<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><book version="5.0" xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2003/XInclude">
	
	<title>Niviok 1.0 Specification</title>
	<subtitle>Edition 1 Draft 2008-07-10</subtitle>
	
	<info>
		<copyright>
			<year>2008</year>
			<holder>James Justin Harrell</holder>
		</copyright>
		
		<legalnotice>Permission is granted to use, copy, display, modify, sell, and distribute this document. This document is provided &quot;as is&quot; without warranty of any kind. In no event shall anyone be liable for any damages or other liability arising from use of this document.</legalnotice>
	</info>
	
	<chapter xml:id="Overview">
		<title>Overview</title>
		
		<para>This document is a draft for the first edition of the specification describing the 1.0 version of Niviok. It can be represented as &quot;Niviok 1.0 Edition 1 Draft 2008-07-10&quot;.</para>
	
		<para>This document is a draft of the first edition of the specification describing the 1.0 version of Niviok.</para>
		
		<para>Niviok is an abstract programming language. This document defines several node types which are used to represent Niviok source code. How Niviok nodes are represented is outside the scope of this standard. While syntax and semantics are not completetly separate, Niviok does contain much less syntax-influenced semantics than most programming languages.</para>
		
		<para>Nodes that can be executed are statements or expressions. Statements are greatly restricted in where they can appear, while expressions are more relaxed and can be interchanged for on another. An expression may produce a value when executed.</para>

		<para>Niviok contains some dynamic aspects, but in several ways is very static. For example, the tree of <link linkend="def.scope">scopes</link> and <link linkend="def.scidentre">scidentres</link> can be entirely known before runtime; scidentres cannot be declared conditionally like in highly dynamic languages such as JavaScript.</para>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="versioning">
		<title>Versioning</title>
		
		<para>Each version of Niviok is described by a specification with one or more editions.</para>
		
		<section xml:id="niviok-version">
			<title>Niviok version</title>
		
			<para>Each version of Niviok is identified by a major version number and a minor version number, both integers. Each new version that is mostly backwards compatible with the previous version increments the minor version number by one. Each new version that is significantly backwards incompatible increments the major version number by one and resets the minor version number to 0.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="specification-version">
			<title>Specification version</title>
			
			<para>Each version of Niviok is described by a specification that can have multiple editions. Each edition of a specification describing a particular version of Niviok is identified by an integer which starts at one and is incremented by one for each new edition.</para>
			
			<para>A document that is intended to become an edition is a draft. A finalized edition is no longer in the draft stage. Each draft is identified by the date on which it was published.</para>
			
			<para>Newer editions should serve only to better describe a particular version of Niviok, not to modify that version of Niviok. Newer editions should not attempt to correct problems with Niviok, only errors in describing that version of Niviok.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="version-notation">
			<title>Version notation</title>
			
			<para>A version of Niviok may be represented as &quot;Niviok X.Y&quot; where X is the major version number and Y is the minor version number.</para>
			
			<para>A finalized specification for Niviok may be represented as &quot;Niviok X.Y Edition A&quot; where A is the edition number.</para>
			
			<para>A draft of a specification edition may be represented as &quot;Niviok X.Y Edition A Draft YYYY-MM-DD&quot; where YYYY-MM-DD is the date on which the draft was published.</para>
			
			<para>Example: Niviok 2.3 Edition 4 Draft 2008-01-20</para>
		</section>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="Glossary">
		<title>Glossary</title>

		<glosslist>
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.Niviok-agent">Niviok agent</glossterm>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.agent">agent</glossterm>
				<glossdef>An implementation of the Niviok language. Could be a source interpreter, a bytecode intepreter, a bytecode compiler, a machine code compiler, etc. If it recognizes the semantics of what it's running, and follows the rules of this document, it could be called a Niviok agent. Each agent should define what representations it supports.</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.object">object</glossterm>
				<glossdef>A collection of data that holds state. Created by a class. Only the class that created it can access an object's state. Values are associated with objects.</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.scidentre">scidentre</glossterm>
				<glossdef>bound to one or more values. An identifier in a certain scope is associated with an identikey. In other programming languages, the terms &quot;variable&quot; or &quot;constant&quot; may refer to a similar concept. (Previously called &quot;identikey&quot; by this draft. Transition has only barely begun.)</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
		
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.value">value</glossterm>
				<glossdef>Associated with an object and an interface implementation, except for the null value, which is associated with nothing or associated with an interface</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.active-interface-implementation">active interface implementation</glossterm>
				<glossdef>the interface implementation a value is directly associated with</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.active-interface">active interface</glossterm>
				<glossdef>the interface that the active interface implementation is associated with</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.global-scope">global scope</glossterm>
				<glossdef>the scope of the bundle node. a bundle node has one and only one scope each time the bundle is executed</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.element">element</glossterm>
				<glossdef>A value stored in a container.</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.member">member</glossterm>
				<glossdef>A callee, property, method, or conversion of an interface.</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.method">method</glossterm>
				<glossdef>A member function of an interface.</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
			
			<glossentry>
				<glossterm xml:id="def.scope">scope</glossterm>
				<glossdef>&quot;Environment&quot; in some languages.</glossdef>
			</glossentry>
		</glosslist>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="executing-nodes">
		<title>Executing nodes</title>
		
		<para>No node besides the bundle node can be executed directly. All other nodes must only be executed when required by the execution instructions of another node, or as required to call a callee/method (such as when calling a value created by a function node). ((XXX clarify execution through calling)) Because values can only be created, directly or indirectly, by executing the bundle node, and because all node execution instructions only every instruct to execute child nodes, all node execution occurs as a result of executing the root bundle node.  All Niviok nodes that are executed in any way must be part of a complete Niviok node tree, which means having an bundle node as the root node.</para>
		
		<para>Note: A bundle might not have a main function. It might just expose its members, such as for scripting or a library.</para>
		
		<para>interpreted:</para>
		<orderedlist>
			<listitem>a bundle representation is parsed to extract a tree of Niviok nodes</listitem>
			<listitem>libraries are loaded and linked</listitem>
			<listitem>tree is processed</listitem>
			<listitem>optimization</listitem>
			<listitem>execution of the planes' declaration-first nodes</listitem>
			<listitem>execution of the function bound to &quot;main&quot; attached to the bundle node's scope, which may return an exit status</listitem>
			<listitem>returning exit status, or 0 if none specified</listitem>
		</orderedlist>
		
		<para>runtime compilation:</para>
		<orderedlist>
			<listitem>a bundle representation is parsed to extract a tree of Niviok nodes</listitem>
			<listitem>libraries are loaded and linked</listitem>
			<listitem>tree is processed</listitem>
			<listitem>optimization</listitem>
			<listitem>tree translated to bytecode and/or machine code</listitem>
			<listitem>execution of bytecode and/or machine code, which produces an exit status</listitem>
		</orderedlist>
		
		<para>beforehand compilation:</para>
		<orderedlist>
			<listitem>a bundle representation is parsed to extract a tree of Niviok nodes</listitem>
			<listitem>static libaries are loaded</listitem>
			<listitem>information about shared libraries is obtained</listitem>
			<listitem>tree is processed</listitem>
			<listitem>optimization</listitem>
			<listitem>tree translated to bytecode and/or machine code and stored</listitem>
			<listitem>code is loaded</listitem>
			<listitem>shared libraries are loaded and linked</listitem>
			<listitem>processing</listitem>
			<listitem>execution of bytecode and/or machine code, which produces an exit status</listitem>
		</orderedlist>
		
		<para>This spec should define how to:</para>
		<simplelist>
			<member>process a bundle (a valid tree of Niviok nodes with a bundle node as the root node)</member>
			<member>execute nodes of a processed tree</member>
			<member>execute a bundle</member>
		</simplelist>
		
		<para>Implementations that aren't interpreters should produce equivalent behavior when being executed.</para>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="overview-part-2">
		<title>Overview part 2</title>
		
		<para>Niviok is represented by a node tree. The way this node tree is represented is not covered in this specification. This specification explains what kind of node tree a representation can represent, the meaning of the nodes in a Niviok node tree, and how to execute the node tree.</para>
		
		<para>This node tree has scopes attached at various places. These scopes contain identikeys that are bound to namespaces and values.</para>
		
		<section xml:id="identifiers">
			<title>Identifiers</title>
			
			<glosslist>
				<glossentry>
					<glossterm xml:id="def.identifier">identifier</glossterm>
					<glossdef>sequence of words, with an optional ending exclamation mark or question mark</glossdef>
				</glossentry>
				<glossentry>
					<glossterm xml:id="def.word">word</glossterm>
					<glossdef>sequence of Unicode characters, where each Unicode character is a letter or an Arabic numerical digit</glossdef>
				</glossentry>
				<glossentry>
					<glossterm xml:id="def.letter">letter</glossterm>
					<glossdef>member of an alphabet, abjad, abugida, syllabary, or logogram</glossdef>
				</glossentry>
			</glosslist>
		
			<para>Because identifiers are defined in terms of Unicode characters, letters are case sensitive wherever Unicode defines an uppercase and lowercase character for the same letter. Control characters, surrogates, whitespace characters, punctuation marks, and combining characters are not letters. This specification does not specify all characters that do or do not qualify as letters, but it does list some characters that must be recognized a certain way.</para>
			
			<para>Arabic numerical digits: (complete)</para>
			<screen>0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9</screen>
			
			<para>letters: (incomplete)</para>
			<screen>a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z</screen>
			
			<para>not letters: (incomplete)</para>
			<screen>0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 ` ~ ! @ # $ % ^ &amp; * ( ) { } [ ] / ? = + \ | - _ ' &quot; , &lt; &gt; .</screen>
			
			<para>Examples of how identifiers might be represented:</para>
			<programlisting>
do some stuff
XML_HTTP_request
we\are\finished?
mutate`this`thing!
			</programlisting>
		</section>
			
		<section xml:id="scidentres">
			<title>Scidentres</title>
			
			<para role="xxx">Need to replace &quot;identikey&quot; with &quot;scidentre&quot;.</para>
			
			<para>An identikey is associated with a scope and an identifier. It may be associated with a nullable-type, a worker, multiple workers, and/or a namespace. Some identikeys can be mutated.</para>

			<para>Every scope is assocciated with zero or more identikeys. Identikeys associated with the same scope must each be associated with a different identifier.</para>

			<para>When an identifier node is executed, every identikey in the scope the identifier node resides in is checked to see if the identikey is associated with an equivalent identifier. If it is, the value produce by executing the identifier node is obtained from the identikey. The identifier node execution process moves up through the scope tree (not to be confused with the scope formula tree) looking for an identikey associated with an equivalent identifier.</para>
			
			<glosslist>
				<glossentry>
					<glossterm xml:id="def.namespace">namespace</glossterm>
					<glossdef>associated with a namespace when created. immutable. multiple declarations of the same scidentre can be made in the same scope.</glossdef>
				</glossentry>
				
				<glossentry>
					<glossterm xml:id="def.constant">constant</glossterm>
					<glossdef>associated with a worker when created. immutable.</glossdef>
				</glossentry>
				
				<glossentry>
					<glossterm xml:id="def.overload">overload</glossterm>
					<glossdef>associated with a worker when created. immutable. multiple declarations of the same scidentre can be made in the same scope.</glossdef>
				</glossentry>
				
				<glossentry>
					<glossterm xml:id="def.variable">variable</glossterm>
					<glossdef>can be mutated to point to different workers. only workers that match the type can be assigned to the identikey (note that the type could be e.g. any or Nullable&lt;any&gt;)</glossdef>
				</glossentry>
			</glosslist>
			
			<para>A function identikey can be bound to multiple functions (objects that implement a function interface; xxx link) at the same time. A function identikey can never be bound to multiple functions with the same interface.</para>
			
			<para>If a value has multiple callees, the active interface is not a function interface, and thus it cannot be bound to a function identikey. The value must be cast to each function interface, and each resulting value bound individually to the function identikey.</para>

			<programlisting>
var foo 123
foo = &quot;bar&quot;
foo = getSomething()

var Int num
num = 2
num = 89

var ?auto bar getSomething()
bar = getSomethingWithSameTypeAsBefore()

interface Foo
	func fooMeth()

interface Bar
	func barMeth()

var obj getFoo()
obj.fooMeth()
obj = getBar()
obj.barMeth()

var foo
foo = getBar()
foo.barProp
foo = 3
foo.minus(5)
foo = &quot;test&quot;
foo.toUpperCase()
foo = CMyClass()
foo.myClassProp
foo = cast&lt;BazInterface&gt;(alpha)
foo.bazProp
foo = (alpha as MazInterface)
foo.mazProp
foo = alpha as GazInterface
foo.gazProp
(BazInterface foo).bazProp
(MazInterface foo).mazProp
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="builtin-numbers">
			<title>Built-in numbers</title>
			
			<para>The built-in implementations of the Int and Rat interfaces must be able to handle numbers of an arbitrary complexity. Built-in libraries should handle numbers of an arbitrary complexity. Niviok implementations must not ever introduce rounding errors or otherwise introduce numerical errors without being explicitly told that such errors may occur.</para>
			
			<para>For example, pow(10, pow(10,100)), must correctly return an Int object reference that accurately represents a googolplex, and must be able to perform operations on this number with perfect accuracy.</para>
			
			<para>Implementations may throw errors when they are unable to perfectly represent a number. Implementations must not silently introduce errors. This is the only alternative to perfectly representing the number.</para>
			
			<para>For example, if the implementation was directed by user code to print a googolplex without using scientific notation (i.e. a &quot;1&quot; followed by a googol &quot;0&quot;), the implementation may throw an error specifying that it is unable to create such a representation.</para>
		</section>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="values">
		<title>Values</title>
		
		<para>Values are associated with an object and an interface implementation.</para>
		
		<para>Objects hold which is used by the interface implementation. This state can only be accessed or modified by interface implementations that they object was intented to hold state for. Objects have an ID that never changes. Each interface implementation consists of the implementation of the members of that interface.</para>
		
		<para>This specification may speak of values implementing interfaces. In these cases, what is actually refered to is whether the interface implementation the value is associtiated with is in a tree where one of the interface implementations is an implementation of that interface. The value itself does not actually implement any interfaces.</para>
		
		<para>Interface implementations form a tree. Multiple interface implementations in the same tree can implement the same iterface. When a value has an active interface that has multiple implementations, the interface implementation that is used when the value is accessed is the interface implementation that the vaule is associated with.</para>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="functions">
		<title>Functions</title>
		
		<para>Functions are just values with an active interface that defines callees. Functions can be &quot;called&quot;. Functions can have a return interface and parameters. Parameters have an interface and an optional default value.</para>
		
		<section xml:id="function-interfaces">
			<title>Function interfaces</title>
			
			<para>XXX this needs a lot of work</para>
			
			<para>Function interfaces implement FunctionInterface instead of Interface and inherit from Function. FunctionInterface simply inherits from Interface and defines no new members. Function interfaces declare a callee and an &quot;apply&quot; method that hides the members of the Function interface.</para>
			
			<screen>interface Function
	callee(dyn[] params) dyn
	func apply(dyn[] arguments) dyn //actually takes an array
	func bind(dyn[] params) dyn
	func call(dyn[] params) dyn
	func curry(dyn[] params) dyn
	get List&gt;Parameter&gt; parameters
	get Bool return?
	get nullable Interface returnInterface

all function interfaces
	inherit Function
	callee(...) ...
	func apply(dyn[] params) ...
	func call(...) ...

For example, for func(Int a, Rat b, String c) Bool :

interface (func(Int a, Rat b, String c) Bool)
	inherit Function
	callee(Int a, Rat b, String C) Bool
	func apply(dyn[] params) Bool
	func call(Int a, Rat b, String C) Bool
	get parameters returns List {
		Parameter { &quot;a&quot;, Int },
		Parameter { &quot;b&quot;, Rat },
		Parameter { &quot;c&quot;, String } }
	get return? returns true
	get returnInterface returns Bool</screen>
		</section>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="interfaces">
		<title>Interfaces</title>
		
		<para>Interfaces define a means of interacting with an object's state. Interfaces declare that implementations will be able to provide object references with specified interfaces when asked for the object reference bound to identifiers specified by the interface and/or that implementations will be able to bind object references with specified interfaces to specified identifiers. Methods are a type of property. Methods are callable and cannot be assigned, only retrieved.</para>
		
		<para>Interfaces cannot inherit in a circle. (E.g., interface A cannot inherit interface B if interface B inherits interface A.) Interfaces cannot inherit from themselves. (However, interfaces created by instantiating values created from generic-interface nodes should not throw errors if the interface tries to inherit itself. Instead, the error should be silently ignored. This is to allow generic interfaces to inherit other forms of themselves.) Interfaces that do not explicitly inherit any interfaces, should implicitly inherit Object. Therefore, all interfaces inherit from Object, either directly or indirectly.</para>
		
		<para>Interfaces can declare that properties are &quot;get only&quot;, &quot;set only&quot;, or &quot;get and set&quot;.</para>
		
		<para>Interface member functions can have default values. This differs from a class with abstract members because interfaces cannot have any private members, so these default functions can not store or extract state in the object. These functions are only intended to call other member functions or throw errors.</para>
		
		<para>There are two kinds of interfaces: object interfaces (Interface) and function interfaces (FuncInterface). Object interfaces define properties and methods. Function interfaces define parameters and a return type. An interface cannot be a function interface and an object interface, though an object interface can have call methods that allow implementations to be used like functions. A function interface can be wrapped to an object interface with a single call method.</para>
		
		<para>Interface callees and members may refer to the interface. This is useful when an interface wants to define a method that returns an object reference with itself as the active interface. For generic interfaces, it is also possible to refer to the generic template.</para>
		
		<programlisting>

interface Int
	func power(Self) Self
	r Self timesTwo

//some representations may be able to translate the below example as well

iterface Int
	func power(Int) Int
	r Int timesTwo

//note that the interface node will have no knowledge of the identifier it is being bound to

//generics:

interface&lt;T&gt; Print
	callee(T) Self

Print&lt;Int&gt; print = getIntPrinter()
print(3)(5)(8) //the print callee returns a Print&lt;Int&gt; object reference

//refering to Generic interface

interface&lt;T&gt; Print
	callee(T) GenericSelf

Print print = getGenericPrinter()
print &lt;Int&gt;(3) &lt;String&gt;(&quot;foo&quot;) &lt;Rat&gt;(1.23)

//some representations may also allow:
print 3 &quot;foo&quot; 1.23

		</programlisting>
		
		<section xml:id="interface-operations">
			<title>Adding and subtracting interfaces</title>
			
			<para>Interfaces can be added together to produce other interfaces. How this addition occurs depends on whether the operands were produce through addition, and the inherited interfaces of the operands.</para>
			
			<para>If an interface is &quot;fromAddition&quot;, it was produced through addition and/or subtract. The <link linkend="ident.Interface">Interface interface</link> exposes this information as a property.</para>
			
			<para>Interfaces produced from addition don't define any members themeselves; they only inherit from other interfaces.</para>
			
			<para>No interface can inherit from an interface that is fromAddition. When a fromAddition interface is an operand of interface addition, the inheritees of the fromAddition interface are copied into the produced interface, but the produced interface does not inherit from the fromAddition operands.</para>
			
			<para>No interface that is fromAddition can inherit from a single interface. When subtracting from a fromAddition interface, and the produced interface would have otherwise only inherited from a single interface, the produced interface is actually that single interface that it would have inherited from.</para>
			
			<screen>interface A
	fromAddition = false

interface B
	fromAddition = false

interface C
	fromAddition = true

interface D
	fromAddition = true

interface A+B
	inherit A
	inherit B

interface A+C
	inherit A
	C's inheritees (doesn't inherit from C)

interface A+D
	inherit A
	D's inheritees (doesn't inherit from D)

interface B+C
	inherit B
	C's inheritees (doesn't inherit from C)

interface B+D
	inherit B
	D's inheritees (doesn't inherit from D)

interface C+D
	C's inheritees (doesn't inherit from C)
	D's inheritees (doesn't inherit from D)

(A+B)-B must be A, not a fromAddition interface that inherits only from A.

consider this expression:
	(A+B+C)-(B+C)
if:
	* C is fromAddition
	* A and B are not fromAddition
	* C inherits from C1, C2, and C3
then the expresison is equal to:
	(A+B+C1+C2+C3)-(B+C1+C2+C3)
	(A+B+C1+C2+C3)-B-C1-C2-C3
	A</screen>

			<para>xxx ENSURE ORDER DOESN'T MATTER</para>
			
			<para>Addition with operands A and B:</para>
			<orderedlist>
				<listitem>Create an interface, PRODUCT, where fromAddition is true.</listitem>
				<listitem>If A is fromAddition, copy the inheritees of A to PRODUCT. If A is not fromAddition, add A as an inheritee to PRODUCT.</listitem>
				<listitem>If B is fromAddition, copy the inheritees of B to PRODUCT. If B is not fromAddition, add B as an inheritee to PRODUCT.</listitem>
				<listitem>If PRODUCT has only one inheritee, produce that inheritee. Otherwise, produce PRODUCT.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<para>Note: An example of when PRODUCT would only have one inheritee from addition is when an interface that is not fromAddition is added to itself. i.e. A + A = A</para>
			
			<para>Subtraction with operands A and B:</para>
			<orderedlist>
				<listitem>If A is not fromAddition, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>Copy A as PRODUCT. (i.e. Copy A. We'll refer to this copy as PRODUCT.)</listitem>
				<listitem>If B is fromAddition, remove every inheritee of B from the inheritees of PRODUCT. If any of the inheritees of B is not an inheritee of PRODUCT, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>If B is not fromAddition, remove B from the inheritees of PRODUCT. If B is an inheritee of PRODUCT, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>If PRODUCT has only one inheritee, produce that inheritee. If PRODUCT does not have any inheritees, throw an error. Otherwise, produce PRODUCT.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
		</section>
	</chapter>

	<chapter xml:id="scopes">
		<title>Scopes</title>
		
		<para>Scopes consist of a collection of identikeys, and unless it is the scope of the bundle node, an association with a parent scope. Scopes form a hierarchy. When identifier nodes are executed, the current scope is searched for an identikey that is associated with that identifier. If one is not found, that scope's parent scope is searched, and so on, until a matching identikey is found. If such an identikey cannot be found, an error results.</para>
		
		<para>When execution enters a node that &quot;has scope&quot;, before executing that node, all contained declare-first descendant nodes that do not have a closer &quot;with scope&quot; ancestor node, are handled according to <link linkend="handling-declare-first">this section</link>.</para> 
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="handling-declare-first">
		<title>Handling declare-first nodes</title>
		
		<para role="xxx">Rename this section to something like &quot;entering node that has scope&quot; or &quot;creating new scope&quot;?</para>
		
		<para>This section specifies the actions that must take place when execution first reaches a node that &quot;has scope&quot;.</para>
		
		<orderedlist role="exec">
			<listitem>Let scopeNode be the node that &quot;has scope&quot; that execution just reached, i.e., the node that lead to this process being performed.</listitem>
			<listitem>Let nodeList be an ordered list of all declare-first nodes that:
				<simplelist>
					<member>are descendants of scopeNode, and</member>
					<member>do not have an ancestor node that:
						<simplelist>
							<member>&quot;has scope&quot; or &quot;has closure&quot;, and</member>
							<member>is a descendant of scopeNode</member>
						</simplelist>
					</member>
				</simplelist>
			</listitem>
			<listitem>Let listCount be the number of elements in nodeList.</listitem>
			<listitem>Let thisScope be a new scope.</listitem>
			<listitem>Add the identikeys specified by the nodes in nodeList to thisScope.</listitem>
			<listitem>Let currentNode be the first node in nodeList. If nodeList is empty, end this process and begin execution of scopeNode with thisScope as the associated scope.</listitem>
			<listitem>Begin executing the [value] member of currentNode.
				<simplelist>
					<member>If execution needs to evaluate an identikey created by this process, and the [value] member of the declare-first node associated with that identikey has not yet been evaluated and the product assigned to that identikey, pause the execution of this [value] member.</member>
					<member>If execution completes successfully, assign the product to the associated identikey, and remove currentNode from nodeList.</member>
				</simplelist>
			</listitem>
			<listitem>Set currentNode to the next node in nodeList and go to step 6. (If currentNode was removed, the next node would be the node that followed currentNode when currentNode was in the list.) If there is no next node, continue to the next step.</listitem>
			<listitem>If the number of elements in nodeList is equal to listCount, a cyclical dependency likely exists, where two or more expressions rely on the result of each other to execute. In this case, throw an error. If the number of elements in nodeList is not equal to listCount, set listCount to the number of elements in nodeList and go to step 5.</listitem>
		</orderedlist>
		
		<screen>Example 1 of a cyclical dependency:

declfirst a = b + 2
declfirst b = a + 3

Example 2 of a cyclical dependency:

declfirst a = b + 2
declfirst b = c + 3
declfirst c = d + 4
declfirst d = e + 5
declfirst e = a + 6

Example 1 of a non-cyclical dependency:

declfirst a = b + 2
declfirst b = c + 3
declfirst c = d + 4
declfirst d = e + 5
declfirst e = 6

Example 2 of a non-cyclical dependency:

declfirst func foo = func() {
	bar()
}

declfirst func bar = func() {
	foo()
}</screen>
	
	<para>Concerning the last example: When one of these functions is called, infinite recursion occurs (negating intervention by the agent), but no such cycle is involved in just executing the function nodes. This is because the calls to foo and bar are not executed when the function nodes are executed.</para>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="nodes">
		<title>Nodes</title>
	
		<para>Niviok defines 69 nodes.</para>
		
		<para>Niviok code is represented by a tree of nodes. How this tree and its nodes are represented is outside the scope of this specification. Many means may exist of representing a Niviok tree.</para>

		<para>Nodes are either base nodes or tree nodes. Tree nodes only contain other nodes, and their entire meaning is derived from their child nodes. Base nodes do not contain any other child nodes, and must is some way encode their meaning themselves.</para>
		
		<para>When a node has multiple child nodes with equivalent meaning, the order of those child nodes is significant, so their order must be specified by some means. The order of nodes of different meaning in relation to each other is not significant, and must not have any observable side effects.</para>
		
		<para>The child nodes of tree nodes are sometimes executed in order, such as expressions in blocks and arguments in function calls. This means the order of the child nodes is sometimes significant and thus should always be preserved.</para>
			
		<para>How ordering is represented has no effect on the semantics (left-to-right, numbered, linked list, etc) as long as there is a specified order. Each representation should specify how nodes are ordered.</para>
		
		<para>Node type names are nouns or noun phrases. XXX find correct English terminology</para>
			
		<section xml:id="node-terminology">
			<title>Node terminology</title>
			
			<para>If a node can contain other nodes, it is a tree node. If a node is contained directly inside another node, the inner node is the child of the outer node, and the outer node is the parent of the inner node. If a node is contained inside another node, but not directly, the inner node is the descendant of the outer node, and the outer node is the ancestor of the inner node.</para>
			
			<para>Expressions can be executed. When executed, they may perform some kind of action; e.g. they can have side effects. Expressions may produce a value when executed.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="tree-node-layout">
			<title>Tree node layout</title>
			
			<para>The number, type, and order of a tree nodes children is determined by the tree node's layout.</para>
		</section>
	
		<section xml:id="node-supertypes">
			<title>Node supertypes</title>
		
			<para>Where the layout for a tree node specifies that a child node is an expression, that child node can be any expression.</para>
		</section>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter version="5.0" xml:id="node-types" xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook">
	<title>Node types</title>

	<para>This chapter describes the various types of nodes. A node type is either a family, tree, or terminal node type. A family node type is a collection of node types. A tree node is a node that is composed of other nodes. Tree nodes do not directly encode any data themselves. The nodes a tree node type contains is specified by the tree node's layout. When the a layout specifies the type of a child node is that of a family node type, the type of the child that takes that place must be in the collection of that family node type. A terminal node encodes data directly and does not contain other nodes.</para>
	
	<section xml:id="terminal-node-types">
		<title>Terminal nodes</title>
		
		<para>These node types do not contain child nodes, and are thus the only nodes that must encode information themselves (as opposed to containing child nodes which together provide information).</para>

		
		<simplelist xml:id="terminal-node-types-list"><member linkend="node.boolean">boolean</member><member linkend="node.direction">direction</member><member linkend="node.identifier">identifier</member><member linkend="node.integer">integer</member><member linkend="node.member-status">member-status</member><member linkend="node.member-type">member-type</member><member linkend="node.rational">rational</member><member linkend="node.string">string</member></simplelist>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="family-node-types">
		<title>Family node types</title>
		
		<section xml:id="node.expression">
			<title>expression</title>
			
			<para>Any node type specified directly in one the following listed sections is an expression node.  (Excludes node types specified in the sections of other node types.) Expression nodes can be executed, and may produce values.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="family-members">
				<member linkend="non-producing-expressions">Non-producing Expressions</member>
				<member linkend="sometimes-producing-expressions">Sometimes producing expressions</member>
				<member linkend="always-producing-expressions">Always producing expressions</member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.statement-declaration">
			<title>statement-declaration</title>
			
			<para>Declares new local identikeys and assigns new stuff to them.</para>
			
			<para>This family node type includes these types:</para>
			
			<simplelist role="family-members">
				<member><link linkend="node.declare-first">declare-first</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.sieve">sieve</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.namespace">namespace</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.interface-member">
			<title>interface-member</title>
			
			<para>This family node type includes these types:</para>
			
			<simplelist role="family-members">
				<member><link linkend="node.breeder">breeder</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.callee">callee</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.property">property</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.method">method</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="tree-node-layout-key">
		<title>Tree node layout key</title>
		
		<para>This section describes how the layout of a node type is represented in this specification.</para>
		
		<para>The layout for a node type is represented in this specification as a list of items. Each item represents a child node, or multiple child nodes with the same meaning.</para>
		
		<para>Each item in these lists first specifies how many child nodes with that meaning may appear, or it says nothing about the number, which means there must be one (and no more). The ways of representing these amounts is described below.</para>
		
		<variablelist>
			<varlistentry>
				<term>?</term>
				<listitem>0 or 1</listitem>
			</varlistentry>
			<varlistentry>
				<term>*</term>
				<listitem>0 or more</listitem>
			</varlistentry>
			<varlistentry>
				<term>+</term>
				<listitem>1 or more</listitem>
			</varlistentry>
		</variablelist>
		
		<para>Next comes the name of a node type. The child node represented by that list item must be of that type.</para>
		
		<para>Lastly comes a optional label for refering to the child nodes represented by that item, when the type alone isn't enough to disambiguate which item is being referred to. These labels carry no semantic information, and are merely used by this specification to refer to specific child nodes. (Note this label is always singular, even for collections.)</para>
		
		<para>Example layout:</para>
		
		<screen>alpha
? beta gamma
? beta delta
* epsilon
+ expression zeta</screen>
		
		<para>The first item represents a single required child node of type &quot;alpha&quot;. The second item represents an optional child node of type &quot;beta&quot;, which can be referred to using the label &quot;gamma&quot;. The third item represents an optional child node of type &quot;beta&quot;, which can be referred to using the label &quot;delta&quot;. The fourth item refers to a collection of child nodes of type &quot;epsilon&quot;; the collection can be empty. The fifth item refers to a collection of expression child nodes; the collection must contain at least one node; nodes in this collection can be refered to using the label &quot;zeta&quot;.</para>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="non-executable">
		<title>Non-executable</title>
		
		<para>Nodes that cannot be executed. Most serve only to group other nodes together.</para>
		
		<section xml:id="node.argument">
			<title>argument</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>? <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> parameter name</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<programlisting>
func doSomething(Int a = 1, Int b = 2, Int c = 3, Int d) {...}
doSomething(7, default, default, 8)
doSomething(7, c = default, 8)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.boolean">
			<title>boolean</title>
			
			<para>Terminal node. Specifies one of:</para>
			
			<simplelist role="enum">
				<member>true</member>
				<member>false</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Cannot be evaluated because that would conflict with the &quot;true&quot; and &quot;false&quot; members of the Bool enum. Boolean values in the node tree use a boolean node, and boolean values in code use the &quot;true&quot; and &quot;false&quot; identikeys.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.direction">
			<title>direction</title>
			
			<para>Specifies the direction of a function parameter.</para>
			
			<para>Terminal node. Specifies one of:</para>
			
			<simplelist role="enum">
				<member>in</member>
				<member>out</member>
				<member>inout</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="xxx">At one time also included &quot;in-mutable&quot; and &quot;in-mutable-out&quot;. The nun-mutable version would create copies. It is not clear whether these should be kept. Parameter direction is currently ignored.</para>
			
			<para>A value passed to a function as an &quot;in&quot; parameter will not be mutated by the function. This means if the function uses the value in ways that may mutate the value, the value will be copied. If an action in the function may mutate the value, and the value does not declare a copy converter, an error results.</para>
			
			<para>Instances where the value may be mutated include when the interface of the value does not provide opacity information and the function calls a method, or if the interface does provide opacity information but the function calls a mutator method, or if the value is passed to another function as an in-mutable or in-mutable-out parameter.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
func alpha(in Int num) {
println num
}

func beta(in-mutable Int num) {
num += 567
}

func gamma(out Int num) {
//num not currently assigned to anything
num = 987
}

func delta(in-out Int num) {
println num
num = 1001
}

func epsilon(in-mutable-out Int num) {
num += 55555
num = 19591
}

Int num = 123
alpha(num)
beta(num) //value mutated
gamma(num) //num assigned to different value
delta(num) //num assigned to different value
epsilon(num) //value mutated and num assigned to different value
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.import">
			<title>import</title>
			
			<para>Binds a library to a namespace identikey.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> alias</member>
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.import-attempt">import-attempt</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Each import-attempt node attempts to refer to a library. The agent should try each import-attempt node in order until it is able to find one with a scheme that it recognizes and leads to a library the agent is able to load. If the agent is not able to load a library after trying all import-attempt nodes, it must output an error message and end execution immediately.</para>
				
			<programlisting>
import Xml
	&quot;name&quot; : &quot;XmlLib&quot;
	&quot;UUID&quot; : &quot;9d0d5fdc-5a23-4375-892a-8cbfd80f0927&quot;
	&quot;local absolute path&quot; : &quot;/usr/bin/xmllib/niviok/xmllib.niviok.so&quot;
	&quot;local absolute path&quot; : &quot;C:\Program Files\XmlLib\bin\Niviok\xmllib.niviok.so&quot;
	&quot;local relative path&quot; : &quot;bin/xmllib.niviok.so&quot;
	&quot;URL&quot; : &quot;https://www.xmllib.org/repository/xmllib.niviok.so&quot;

def doc = Xml:Document()
doc.appendChild(doc.createElement(&quot;foo&quot;))
def Xml:Element root = doc.documentElement
			</programlisting>
			
			<para>Note that this specification does not define any schemes. Which schemes are supported by an agent is agent-specific.</para>
			
			<para role="xxx">Need versioning information. Could just include versioning information in the body of each import-attempt, but then the version information would have to be repeated for every import-attempt. Even if going with that, example should be updated to inclue versioning information. But what if different schemes wanted to denote versioning information in different ways? For example, shared libraries on Unix have their own versioning system, with version numbers different from the public version number associated with a piece of software.</para>
		</section>
			
		<section xml:id="node.import-attempt">
			<title>import-attempt</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.string">string</link> scheme</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.string">string</link> body</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Used by the <link linkend="node.import">import</link> node.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.member-implementation">
			<title>member-implementation</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.member-type">member-type</link> </member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> interface</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> function</member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.member-type">
			<title>member-type</title>
			
			<para>Terminal node. Specifies one of:</para>
			
			<simplelist role="enum">
				<member>breeder</member>
				<member>callee</member>
				<member>getter</member>
				<member>setter</member>
				<member>method</member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="node.parameter-impl">
			<title>parameter-impl</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.direction">direction</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> default value</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>When a [default value] is given, [default value] is executed for every call to the function. It is not executed when the function node is executed.</para>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="node.parameter-info">
			<title>parameter-info</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.direction">direction</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> has default value</member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="node.worker">
			<title>worker</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> face</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.worker">worker</link> child worker</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.member-implementation">member-implementation</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Note: May actually correspond to multiple workers, since some of the member-implementation nodes may implement members of inherited interfaces.</para>
		</section>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="statements">
		<title>Statements</title>
		
		<para>Statements can be executed. Statements do not produce when executed. Statements differ from non-producing expressions in that statements have special execution rules that greatly restrict where they can appear.</para>
		
		<section xml:id="node.declare-first">
			<title>declare-first</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> overload</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> breed</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="xxx">Should [breed] be required to be false if [wo-scidentre-category] is &quot;function&quot;?</para>
			
			<para>Creates an scidentre in the parent scope ash assigns the specified value to it. If [overload] is true, creates on overload scidentre; otherwise creates a constant scidentre.</para>
			
			<para>The value expressions of declare-first nodes may depend on the values of other declare-first nodes that appear before or after it. Some types of expressions are allowed to reference the scidentres of each other. For example, two interfaces could reference each other.</para>
			
			<para>For more (xxx outdated) information, see <link linkend="handling-declare-first">this section</link>.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
func b {3}

!declfirst !functionworef b = !function(-&gt;Int) { 3 }

declfirst Foo = interface {
	get Bar bar
	get Int number
}

declfirst Bar = interface {
	get Foo foo
}

const Foo foo = getFoo()
println( foo.bar.foo.bar.foo.bar.foo.number )
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.expose">
			<title>expose</title>
			
			<para>Imports all the child identikeys of the specified namespace into the enclosing scope.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<programlisting>
decl std::Array&lt;std::Int&gt; numbers = generateNumbers()

expose std
decl Array&lt;Int&gt; numbers = generateNumbers()
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.hidable">
			<title>hidable</title>

			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> hidden</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.statement-declaration">statement-declaration</link> declaration</member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.sieve">
			<title>sieve</title>
			
			<para>Limits reach of expose and using nodes. Can hide child scidentres.</para>
			
			<para>Like some other special expressions, screen nodes add identikeys to their parent scope, as well as creating their own scope and adding identikeys to it.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>* <link linkend="node.expose">expose</link> </member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.using">using</link> </member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.hidable">hidable</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Example of sieve nodes used to contain the effects of &quot;using&quot; nodes:</para>
			
			<programlisting>
--- file A
module
	import as Foo [...]
	sieve
		include B
		include C

--- file B
using Foo as Bar

--- file C
func main {
	println(Bar:something)
}

--- all together
module
	import as Foo
	sieve
		sieve
			using Foo as Bar
		sieve
			func main {
				Bar:do_something() #error - Bar namespace not defined
			}
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.module">
			<title>module</title>
			
			<para>A grouping of identikey declarations, for use as a library or a standalone program.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.integer">integer</link> niviok major version number</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.integer">integer</link> niviok minor version number</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.import">import</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.sieve">sieve</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>No node can contain a module node. Module nodes are the only nodes which can ever be parentless. All nodes that are ever executed in any way must be part of a complete tree, with a module node as the rootmost node.</para>
			
			<para role="xxx">Following stuff needs to be moved. Also, see &quot;executing module.txt&quot;.</para>
			
			<para>Implementations must not pass any arguments to the main function when executing a bundle as a standalone executable. Implementations should instead provide program arguments through a library which can be imported with the import node. Note that the program arguments are not required by this specification to be a sequence of strings.</para>
			
			<para>The result produced by executing a bundle node as a standalone executable may be converted as necesary to suit the containing environment. How this conversion is performed depends on the containing environment and the Desal implementation, and is not covered by this specification.</para>
			
			<para>When treating a bundle as a standalone executable:</para>
			
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Let globalScope be a new scope.</listitem>
				<listitem>Create the identikeys required by <link linkend="reserved-identikey-names">Reserved identikey names</link>.</listitem>
				<listitem>For each <link linkend="node.import">import</link>, <link linkend="node.using">using</link>, and <link linkend="node.expose">expose</link> child node, add the identikeys to globalScope specified by that node.</listitem>
				<listitem>Execute all declaration-first children of each plane together as required by <link linkend="handling-declare-first">Handling declare-first nodes</link>.</listitem>
				<listitem>Let mainKey be the identikey in globalScope that is associated with identifier &quot;main&quot;. If such an identikey does not exist, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>Let mainVal be the result of evaluating mainKey. If mainVal is null, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>Call mainVal with no arguments and let rv be the result. If mainVal is not callable, throw an error. If mainVal does not have a callee that takes no arguments, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>If rv is null, produce a value, with Int as the active interface, that encodes the number zero. Else if rv has an active interface that inherits from Int, downcast rv to Int and produce the result. Else if rv, with it's current active interface, can breed an Int, have rv breed an Int, and produce the result. Else throw an error.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<para>When treating a bundle as a library:</para>
			
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Let globalScope be a new scope.</listitem>
				<listitem>Create the identikeys required by <link linkend="reserved-identikey-names">Reserved identikey names</link>.</listitem>
				<listitem>For each <link linkend="node.import">import</link>, <link linkend="node.using">using</link>, and <link linkend="node.expose">expose</link> child node, add the identikeys to globalScope specified by that node.</listitem>
				<listitem>Execute all declaration-first children of each plane together as required by <link linkend="handling-declare-first">Handling declare-first nodes</link>.</listitem>
				<listitem>Expose globalScope, in an immutable form, to the containing environment. How this is done depends on the containing enviornment and the Desal implementation, and is not covered by this specification.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<para role="xxx">When acting as a standalone executable, need to specify what happens to exceptions that bubble all the way up to the bundle node. They are caught, an error message is output, and the bundle node returns some value, like 1. The bundle may expose to the containing environment additional information, depending on the enclosing environment and Desal implementation.</para>
			
			<para role="xxx">When acting as a standalone executable, what kind of errors should bundle by throwing? This is a problem that applies to many other nodes as well.</para>
			
			<para role="xxx">For when acting as a library, need a means of hiding/showing certain child namespaces/identikeys of the global namespace. For example, a bundle may have declarations in the global namespace and in a &quot;private&quot; namespace. The bundle should expose the declarations in the global namespace but hide the declarations in the private namespace. There has also been consideration of an &quot;export&quot; attribute/node that would expose specified identikeys, and all other identikeys would not be exposed.</para>
			
			<para role="xxx">The identikeys added to globalScope by import, using, and expose nodes should not be exposed to the containing environment when the bundle is acting as a library.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.namespace">
			<title>namespace</title>
			
			<para>Adds child identikeys to specified namespace. &quot;namespace&quot; here could be thought of as a verb, as in, &quot;Please namespace these identikeys.&quot; This node namespaces child identikeys as directed.</para>

			<para>The namespace node does not have a 1-to-1 correspondence with a namespace. A namespace node merely inserts child identikeys into the specified namespace. Multiple namespace nodes can insert identikeys into the same namespace.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.sieve">sieve</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.using">
			<title>using</title>
			
			<para>Creates an identikey that is associated with the same value/namespace as the specified identikey in the specified namespace.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> target</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<programlisting>
using Xml.XmlElement
using Xml.XmlDocument as Doc

import &quot;.NET: System&quot; as System
using System.Collections.Generic as box
box.IList&lt;Foo&gt; = new box.List&lt;Foo&gt;();
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
using FooBarBaz as FBZ
using System.out.print as puts
puts( (FBZ to String)(Gamma) )
			</programlisting>
			
			<para>Each of the [target] identifiers, except for the last, must refer to a namespace. (The last can also refer to a namespace.)</para>
		</section>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="non-producing-expressions">
		<title>Non-producing expressions</title>
		
		<para>Nodes that can be executed, but never produce.</para>

		<section xml:id="control-flow-alteration">
			<title>Control flow alteration</title>
			
			<para>The nodes alter the control flow when executed. For example, if present in a sequence of statements that are executed in order, executing a node of this type alters control flow in such a way that the following statements in the sequence are not executed (or execution is delayed until other expression nodes have been executed).</para>
			
			<section xml:id="node.remit">
				<title>remit</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member>? <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> label</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<para role="process">Must have REMIT allowance. If [label] is specified, must have labled REMIT allowance of that name.</para>
				
				<para>The catch nodes that follows the catch node that this node was in are checked, as if the catch node that this node was in was never entered.</para>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.throw">
				<title>throw</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<para>If the expression isn't an Exception, throw a NonExceptionThrownError with the value from [value] as the wrapped value.</para>
			</section>
	
			<section xml:id="node.yield">
				<title>yield</title>
				
				<para>Within a generator, specifies the next value for the generator to yield.</para>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<para role="process">Must have YIELD allowance.</para>
				
				<para>Note that this node may, in the future, become more like Python's yield expression, so that the yield node would become a sometimes-producing expression.</para>
			</section>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.declare-empty">
			<title>declare-empty</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Creates a variable scidentre in the parent scope. After this node executes, the produced scidentre does not yet point to a value.</para>

			<programlisting>
var foo
var any foo
var ? foo
var ?any foo
decl Int foo
decl ?Int foo
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
var bar
bar = 123
println(bar)
bar = 456
println(bar)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
	</section>

	<section xml:id="sometimes-producing-expressions">
		<title>Sometimes producing expressions</title>
		
		<para>Nodes that can be executed, and sometimes produce.</para>

		<section xml:id="node.assign">
			<title>assign</title>
			
			<para>Assigns a value to an identikey.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> breed</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="process">The identikey's type must be dynamic, automatic, or strict. If the identikey's type is automatic or strict, the identifier must be variable (not constant).</para>
			
			<para>If bree is false:</para>
			
			<orderedlist>
				<listitem>Let key by the identikey that [name] refers to.</listitem>
				<listitem>Execute [value] and let value be the product.</listitem>
				<listitem>Associate key with value so that key now refers (only) to value.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<para>If breed is true:</para>
			
			<orderedlist>
				<listitem>Let key be the identikey that [name] refers to.</listitem>
				<listitem>Execute [value] and let parentValue be the product.</listitem>
				<listitem>Let faceValue be the required interface for key. If key does not require a particular interface, let faceValue be the active interface of parentValue.</listitem>
				<listitem>Find parentValue's breeder that produces values with an active interface of faceValue. If such a breeder is not found, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>Activate the found breeder and let value be the product.</listitem>
				<listitem>Associate key with value so that key now refers (only) to value.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<para>Example of difference between breeding and not breeding:</para>
			
			<programlisting>
decl Person person1
decl Person person2

person1 = Person()
person1.name = &quot;John&quot;
person2 = person1 //not breeding - person1 and person2 refer to same object
person2.name = &quot;Suzy&quot;
println( person1.name ) //Suzy

person1 = Person()
person1.name = &quot;Michael&quot;
person2 := person1 //breeding - person1 and person2 refer to different objects
person2.name = &quot;Kim&quot;
println( person1.name ) //Michael
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.call">
			<title>call</title>

			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> receiver</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.argument">argument</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Execute [receiver], and let receiver be the result.</listitem>
				<listitem>If result is not callable, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>Execute the argument values in order.</listitem>
				<listitem>Send argument values to receiver for execution.</listitem>
				<listitem>Produce the result on the previous step.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.compound">
			<title>compound</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>* <link linkend="node.expose">expose</link> </member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.using">using</link> </member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.statement-declaration">statement-declaration</link> declaration</member>
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> member</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Has scope.</para>
			
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Execute each expression in order. Produce the result of the last expression. (Produce nothing if the instance contained no expressions or the last expression didn't produce.)</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<programlisting>
compound {
	using System:Console
	using System:Collections as Boxes
	const numbers = Boxes:List&lt;MyFace&gt;()
	Console.WriteLine(numbers.Count.ToString())
}
			</programlisting>
		</section>
			
		<section xml:id="node.conditional">
			<title>conditional</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> test</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> result</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> else</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Execute [test] and let test1 be the result.</listitem>
				<listitem>Downcast test2 to Bool and let test2 be the result.</listitem>
				<listitem>If test2 is true, execute [result] and produce it's result, ending execution.</listitem>
				<listitem>If [else] is not present, produce null, ending execution.</listitem>
				<listitem>Execute [else] and produce it's result.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<programlisting>
decl Int a = (x ? 0 : 1)

if foo == 1
	doStuff1()
elif foo == 2
	doStuff2()
else
	doDefault()

decl bar =
	(foo == 1) ? getOne() :
	(foo == 2) ? getTwo() :
	getDefault()

decl bar =
	if foo == 1 : getOne()
	elif foo == 2 : getTwo()
	else : getDefault()

if not foo.isSetup?
	foo.setup()

unless prefs.dont_do_it
	do_it()
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.curry">
			<title>curry</title>
			
			<para>Provides a built-in means of partial application. (Note that Desal provides no built-in support for the original type of currying, where a multi-argument function is converted into a chain of single-argument functions.)</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> function</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.argument">argument</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> call</member>
			</simplelist>

			<para>If [call] is true, and this node results in the function receiving enough arguments to be called, the function will be called.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
func foo(Int a, Rat b, String c, Bool d) Int {
	...
}

//partial application
func(String,Bool)Int foo2 = foo(1, 2.34)
print foo2(&quot;text&quot;, true)

//other type of currying
func(Int)(
	func(Rat)(
		func(String)(
			func(Bool)Int ))) foo3 = curry(foo)
print foo3(1)(2.34)(&quot;text&quot;)(true)

//The above two are equivalent to:
print foo(1, 2.34, &quot;text&quot;, true)
			</programlisting>
			
			<para>Assuming the function is not called: If the arguments match only one of the callees/methods of [value], this node produces a value with a function interface as the active interface. If the arguments match more than one of the callees/methods on [value], this node produces a value with an active interface that is made by adding the function interfaces of the callees/methods together.</para>
			
			<para>After execution, the specified parameters have values, so they do not appear on the resultant function.</para>
			
			<para>Once the function has all its arguments supplied, it is called if [call] is true, and the result of that call is produced.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
func doStuff1(Int a, String b, Bool alpha) {...}
func doStuff1(Int a, Rat b, Bool alpha) {...}
func doStuff2 = doStuff1~(3, alpha=false)
doStuff2(&quot;test&quot;)
doStuff2(123.456)
			</programlisting>
			
			<para>The middle line perhaps might also be represented this way:</para>
			<programlisting>
(declare-first
	(identifier.name &quot;doStuff2&quot;)
	(curry
		(identifier.value &quot;doStuff1&quot;)
		(argument
			(integer.value 3))
		(argument
			(identifier.name &quot;alpha&quot;)
			(identifier.value &quot;false&quot;))))
			</programlisting>

			<programlisting>
interface Alpha
func bar(Int a, Rat b, String c)

Alpha alpha = AlphaClass()

alpha.bar(0, 0.0, &quot;0&quot;)

func()void bar1 = alpha.bar~()
bar(1, 2.3, &quot;4&quot;)

func()void bar2 = alpha.bar~(c=&quot;text&quot;)
bar2(7, 9.8)

func()void bar3 = alpha.bar~(-9, 0.001, &quot;stuff&quot;)
bar3()
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.declare-assign">
			<title>declare-assign</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> constant</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> breed</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
			</simplelist>

			<para>Creates a scidentre in the parent scope and assigns the specified value to it. If [constant] is false, creates a constant scidentre; otherwise, creates a variable scidentre.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
var any foo = 123
var Nullable&lt;any&gt; foo = 123
var ?any foo = 123
var Int foo = 123
var Nullable&lt;Int&gt; foo = 123
var ?Int foo = 123
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.identifier">
			<title>identifier</title>
			
			<para>Base/terminal node.</para>
			
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Let ident be the identifier specified by this node.</listitem>
				<listitem>Let scope be the current scope.</listitem>
				<listitem>If scope has an identikey that is associated with ident, let scope be the parent scope of scope. If scope has no parent scope, throw an error. Continue moving through parent scopes until an identikey associated with ident is found. Let key be this identikey.</listitem>
				<listitem>If key is a function identikey, find parent function identikeys with that name, but with different types, and merge all the functions together. (XXX elaborate)</listitem>
				<listitem>If key is bound to a value, produce the value that key is bound to. If key has been declared that it can be bound to values, but it is currently not bound to anything, return null.</listitem>
				<listitem>If key is bound to a namespace, throw an error.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<programlisting>
println( foo )
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(println foo)
			</programlisting>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="node.namespaced-wo-scidentre">
			<title>namespaced-wo-scidentre</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> namespace</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> identikey name</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<programlisting>
namespace foo {
	namespace bar {
		decl Int alpha = 123
	}
}
decl Int alpha = foo:bar:alpha
println( alpha ) //123
			</programlisting>
		</section>
	
		<section xml:id="node.select">
			<title>select</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> input value</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.case">case</link> </member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> else</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="exec">Execute [value]. Execute each [values] child of each [case] and compare them to the [value] value (with the .equals? method of the [value] value) until finding a match. Then, execute the [result] of that case and produce the result. If no match is found, and [else] is given, execute [else] and produce its result.</para>
			
			<section xml:id="node.case">
				<title>case</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member>+ <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> test value</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> result</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<programlisting>
select event.type
case Events.QUIT {
	return
}
case Events.FOO, Events.BAR, Events.MAZ {
	//no action
}
else {
	throw ErrorClass(&quot;unknown event type&quot;)
}

select foo
case 1
	doStuff1()
case 2
	doStuff2()
else
	doDefault()

decl bar = select foo
	case 1 : getOne()
	case 2 : getTwo()
	else getDefault()
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.set-property">
			<title>set-property</title>

			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> source</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> property name</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Sets the value of a property. If the active interface of the value does not have a property with the specified name, or the property cannot be set, an error results. Evaluates to the value given by [value].</para>
			
			<programlisting>
alpha.beta = &quot;gamma&quot;
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(= alpha.beta &quot;gamma&quot;)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.try-catch">
			<title>try-catch</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> try</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.catcher">catcher</link> </member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> on success</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> finally</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="process">Must contain more than just [try].</para>
			
			<section xml:id="node.catcher">
				<title>catcher</title>

				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
					<member>? <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
					<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> test</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> result</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<para role="allowance">The [result] node adds a REMIT allowance.</para>
			</section>
			
			<screen>function execute ( Node_TryCatch node, IScope parentScope ) -&gt; IWorker {
	IScope tryCatchScope = new Scope(parentScope)
	IWorker result
	try {
		result = execute(node.try, tryCatchScope)
	}
	catch( ClientException exception ) {
		for(Node_Catch c in node.catchs) {
			try {
				Type type = Type.wrap(execute(c.type, tryCatchScope))
				if (can_downcast(exception.worker, type)) {
					IScope catchScope = new Scope(parentScope)
					if (c.name != null) {
						G.declareAssign(
							c.name.value
							WoScidentreCategory.CONSTANT,
							type,
							exception.worker,
							catchScope)
					}
					if (c.test != null) {
						if (unwrapBoolean(execute(c.test, catchScope)) == false) {
							continue
						}
					}
					try {
						result = execute(c.result, catchScope)
					}
					catch( ClientRemit remit ) {
						continue
					}
				}
			}
			catch( ClientException exception2 ) {
				if (node.finally != null) {
					execute(node.finally, tryCatchScope)
					throw exception2
				}
			}
		}
		if (node.finally != null) {
			execute(node.finally, tryCatchScope)
			throw exception
		}
	}
	if (node.onSuccess != null) {
		try {
			result = execute(node.onSuccess, tryCatchScope)
		}
		catch( ClientException exception ) {
			if (node.finally != null) {
				execute(node.finally, tryCatchScope)
				throw exception
			}
		}
	}
	if (node.finally != null) {
		execute(node.finally, tryCatchScope)
	}
	return result
}

Execute [try] and let result be the result.
If an exeception raised up through [try] as it was being executed:
	Let exception be the exception.
	For each [catch] child:
		Execute the type expression and let type be the result.
		If the [type] of catch does not match exception, continue to the next catch.
		If the catch specifies a name, bind the exception to that name as a constant.
		If tha catch specifies a test, execute the test, and continue to the next catch if the result is false.
		Execute the [result] of catch and set result to be the product, then stop looking for a catch.
		If a remit signal raises out of the catch while executing it, continue the search for a catch.
		If an exception raises out of the type, test, or result expressions, execute [finally] if present, and then allow the exception to rise out.
	If no matching catch nodes were found, execute [finally] if present, and then allow the exception to rise out.
Otherwise, execute [on success] if present and set [result] to be the result. If an exception raises out of [on success] while executing it, execute [finally] and allow the exception to rise out.
Execute [finally] if present.
Produce result.</screen>
			
			<programlisting>
try
	decl foo = getSomething()
observe( OutOfMemoryError )
	println &quot;I'm not catching that!&quot;
	//exception is noticed by this try-catch node, but not caught
	//the exception continues to rise out
catch( NullError )
	println &quot;null error&quot;
catch( FooError e )
	println &quot;FooError: (e.message)&quot;
catch( Error )
	println &quot;unknown error&quot;
catch( Exception )
	println &quot;unknown exception&quot;
observe
	println &quot;how execution reach here? am not good with computer&quot;
else
	println &quot;no errors!&quot;
	doSomeStuff() //don't catch errors from this in this node
finally
	cleanup(foo)

decl Status stat =
try
	doSomething()
	Statuses.SUCCESS
catch( NotSoBadError ) {
	Statuses.ERROR
observe
	println &quot;something horrible not caught when trying to doSomething()&quot;
			</programlisting>
			
			<para role="xxx">This node is too complicated. Try to simplify it. In particular, see about removing remit node and reintroducing catch/observe distinction.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.type-select">
			<title>type-select</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> input value</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> casted name</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> require match</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.type-case">type-case</link> </member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> else</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="process">[require match] must be present if and only if an [else] is not given.</para>
			
			<para>If [require match] is true (which means an [else] was not given) and no match was found, an exception is thrown.</para>
			
			<section xml:id="node.type-case">
				<title>type-case</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member>+ <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> test type</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> result</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<screen>if e is declare-assign
	e2 = e as declare-assign
	sb.reserveWoScidentre( e2.name, e2.category )
elif e is declare-empty
	e2 = e as declare-empty
	sb.reserveWoScidentre( e2.name, e2.category )

typeselect e as e2
case declare-assign
	sb.reserveWoScidentre( e2.name, e2.category )
case declare-empty
	sb.reserveWoScidentre( e2.name, e2.category )

typeselect e as e2
case declare-assign, declare-empty
	sb.reserveWoScidentre( e2.name, e2.category )</screen>
		</section>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="always-producing-expressions">
		<title>Always producing expressions</title>
		
		<para>Expressions that, aside from e.g. exceptions, always produce when executed. These nodes, other than the and, nand, or, and nor nodes, are not intended to have side effects.</para>
		
		<section xml:id="boolean-logic">
			<title>Boolean logic</title>
			
			<section xml:id="node.and">
				<title>and</title>
				
				<para>Evaluates to false if either child expression evaluates to false.</para>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> first</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> second</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<orderedlist role="exec">
					<listitem>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [1] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>If [2] is false, evaluate this node to false.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [4] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate this node to [5].</listitem>
				</orderedlist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.nand">
				<title>nand</title>
				
				<para>Evaluates to true if either child expression evaluates to false.</para>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> first</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> second</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<orderedlist role="exec">
					<listitem>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [1] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>If [2] is false, evaluate this node to true.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [4] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate this node to the inverse of [5].</listitem>
				</orderedlist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.or">
				<title>or</title>
				
				<para>Evaluates to true if either child expression evaluates to true.</para>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> first</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> second</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<orderedlist role="exec">
					<listitem>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [1] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>If [2] is true, evaluate this node to true.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [4] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate this node to [5].</listitem>
				</orderedlist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.nor">
				<title>nor</title>
				
				<para>Evaluates to false if either child expression evaluates to true.</para>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> first</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> second</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<orderedlist role="exec">
					<listitem>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [1] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>If [2] is true, evaluate this node to false.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [4] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate this node to the inverse of [5].</listitem>
				</orderedlist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.xor">
				<title>xor</title>
				
				<para>Evaluates to true if the child expressions evaluate to different values.</para>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> first</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> second</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<orderedlist role="exec">
					<listitem>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [1] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [3] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>If [2] and [4] are different, evaluate to true. Otherwise, evaluate to false.</listitem>
				</orderedlist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.xnor">
				<title>xnor</title>
				
				<para>Evaluates to true if the child expressions evaluate to the same value.</para>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> first</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> second</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<orderedlist role="exec">
					<listitem>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [1] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</listitem>
					<listitem>Downcast [3] to Bool.</listitem>
					<listitem>If [2] and [4] are the same, evaluate to true. Otherwise, evaluate to false.</listitem>
				</orderedlist>
			</section>
			
			<programlisting>
true and false
true xnor false
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(and true false)
(xnor true false)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.breed">
			<title>breed</title>
			
			<para>Creates a new object (&quot;offspring&quot;) that encodes some or all of the information from the parent, and exposes that information through the specified interface. If an interface is not specified, the new object has same type as the parent, and should encode most or all of the information from the parent. If an interface is specified, the new object may be an exact copy of the parent object, or it may be of a completetly different form that encodes very little information from the parent object.</para>
			
			<para>This node can be used to copy a value, or to convert a value into a different type.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> parent</member>
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> interface</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Execute [parent] and let parentValue be the product.</listitem>
				<listitem>Execute [interface] and let faceValue be the product. If [interface] is not given, let faceValue be the active interface of parentValue.</listitem>
				<listitem>Find parentValue's breeder that produces values with faceValue as the active interface. If such a breeder is not found, throw an error.</listitem>
				<listitem>Activate the found breeder.</listitem>
				<listitem>Produce the new value produced by the breeder.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<programlisting>
decl Int num1 = 987
decl Int num2 = copy(num)
decl Rat num3 = (num to Rat)
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(decl Int num1 987)
(decl Int num2 (copy num))
(decl Rat num3 (breed num Rat))
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.caller">
			<title>caller</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> interface</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> method name</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Creates a function that, when passed the type specified by [interface], calls the method named [method name] on the first argument with the rest of the arguments sent to it. It's purpose is to help with functional programming.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
interface Foo {
	func doStuff(Int, Int) Rat
}

decl Foo foo = getFoo()
decl func(Foo,Int,Int)Rat doStuffer = Foo::doStuff
println doStuffer(foo,3,7)

decl doStuffer2 = dyn::doStuff
println doStuffer2(foo,3,7)

//below all equilavent:
println Foo::doStuff(foo,3,7)
println dyn::doStuff(foo,3,7)
println foo.doStuff(3,7)
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(decl Foo foo
	(getFoo))
(decl auto doStuffer
	(caller Foo doStuff))
(println (doStuffer foo 3 7))

(decl const doStuffer2
	(caller dyn doStuff))
(println (doStuffer2 foo 3 7))
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.object">
			<title>object</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.worker">worker</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.dictionary">
			<title>dictionary</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> key type</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value type</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.dictionary-entry">dictionary-entry</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<section xml:id="node.dictionary-entry">
				<title>dictionary-entry</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> key</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<programlisting>
decl ages = dict (String, Int) {
	&quot;Saray&quot; : 12,
	&quot;John&quot; : 70,
	&quot;Mike&quot; : 23
}

for pair name, age in ages
	println name &quot; &quot; age
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(decl const ages
	(dict String Int
		((&quot;Saray&quot; 12) (&quot;John&quot; 70) (&quot;Mike&quot; 23))))

(forpair name age ages
	(println name &quot; &quot; age))
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.enum">
			<title>enum</title>
			
			<para>An enum is similar to an immutable dict.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.enum-entry">enum-entry</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="process">If [type] is not given, no enum entries can have a value. If [type] is given, all enum entries must have a value. Note that every enum entry has have a unique value. (XXX include restriction in execution instructions)</para>
			
			<section xml:id="node.enum-entry">
				<title>enum-entry</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
					<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> value</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<para>If [type] is given:</para>
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Let EntryFace be a new interface that inherits from EnumDictEntry&lt;T&gt; where T is specified by [type].</listitem>
				<listitem>For every [enum-entry], create a value with EntryFace as the active interface, where the &quot;value&quot; and &quot;name&quot; properties are those specified by the [enum-entry].</listitem>
				<listitem>Let ListFace be a new interface. For every [enum-entry], add a readonly property to ListFace with the type of EntryFace and a name specified by the [enum-entry].</listitem>
				<listitem>Let EnumFace be a new interface that inherits from Interface, EnumDict&lt;T, U&gt;, and ListFace, where T is EntryFace and U is specified by [type].</listitem>
				<listitem>Let EnumInstance be a value with EnumFace as the active interface such that:
					<simplelist>
						<member>the value given from getting a property of ListFace is the value created in step 2 that is associated with the same [enum-entry] as the property</member>
						<member>the Interface implementation is EntryFace, i.e. EnumInstance cast to Interface is EnumFace</member>
					</simplelist>
				</listitem>
				<listitem>Produce EnumInstance.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<para>If [type] is not given:</para>
			<orderedlist role="exec">
				<listitem>Let EntryFace be a new interface that inherits from EnumEntry.</listitem>
				<listitem>For every [enum-entry], create a value with EntryFace as the active interface, where the &quot;name&quot; property is that specified by the [enum-entry].</listitem>
				<listitem>Let ListFace be a new interface. For every [enum-entry], add a readonly property to ListFace with the type of EntryFace and a name specified by the [enum-entry].</listitem>
				<listitem>Let EnumFace be a new interface that inherits from Interface, Enum&lt;T&gt;, and ListFace, where T is EntryFace.</listitem>
				<listitem>Let EnumInstance be a value with EnumFace as the active interface such that:
					<simplelist>
						<member>the value given from getting a property of ListFace is the value created in step 2 that is associated with the same [enum-entry] as the property</member>
						<member>the Interface implementation is EntryFace, i.e. EnumInstance cast to Interface is EnumFace</member>
					</simplelist>
				</listitem>
				<listitem>Produce EnumInstance.</listitem>
			</orderedlist>
			
			<para>Note that the sections specifying Enum, EnumDict, EnumEntry, and EnumDictEntry have additional requirements on the behavior of instances of these interfaces.</para>
			
			<screen>enum Animal {
	dog, cat, fish, parrot, ferret, gerbil, hamster
}

interface EntryFace
	inherit EnumEntry

interface ListFace
	get EntryFace dog
	get EntryFace cat
	get EntryFace fish
	get EntryFace parrot
	get EntryFace ferret
	get EntryFace gerbil
	get EntryFace hamster

interface EnumFace
	inherit Interface
	inherit Enum&lt;EntryFace&gt;
	inherit EnumList

Animal a = Animal.dog
Animal b = Animal.fromName(&quot;cat&quot;)
println Animal.size //assuming size is specified by Collection&lt;T&gt;

for animal in Animal
	println animal.name

activeInterface(Animal) == Interface + Enum&lt;EntryFace&gt; + EnumList
(Animal as Interface) == EntryFace</screen>
			
			<programlisting>
(enum Animal
	(dog cat fish parrot ferret gerbil hamster)

(for animal Animal
	(println animal.name))
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.extract-member">
			<title>extract-member</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> source</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> member name</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para>Retrieves the a method or the value of a property from the value specified by [source]. If the active interface of the value specified by [source] does not have a property or method with the specified name, throw an exception.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
println( alpha.beta )
alpha.doStuff()
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(println alpha.beta)
(alpha.doStuff)
			</programlisting>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="node.function">
			<title>function</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>* <link linkend="node.parameter-impl">parameter-impl</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> return type</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> body</member>
			</simplelist>

			<para role="allowance">The [body] node adds a RETURN allowance and removes REMIT and YIELD allowances.</para>
			
			<para>If [return info] is not present, the function does not return anything, meaning it does not produce a value when called.</para>
			
			<para>When this node is executed, it produces a value with a function interface as the active interface. Only the [parameter] node and [return info]'s [interface] nodes are executed at this time. When the resultant value is called, the [body] node is executed in the scope of this function node.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
func square = { n | n * n }

println( square(3) )
=&gt; 9
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(decl const square
	(function (a) void
		(* a a)))

(println (square 2))
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
decl square = {a|a*a}
println( square(2) )
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
println( {a|a*a} 2 )
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.function-interface">
			<title>function-interface</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> template-argument-count</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.parameter-info">parameter-info</link> </member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> return type</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<programlisting>
println( func(Int,Int)Rat )
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(println (funcface (Int Int) Rat))
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.generator">
			<title>generator</title>

			<para>Produces a value that implements an instantiation of the Generator generic interface.</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> body</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="allowance">The [body] adds a YIELD allowance and removes REMIT and RETURN allowances.</para>
			
			<para>If [type] is not given, the generator does not produce. (The generator could still be useful for producing side effects.)</para>
			
			<programlisting>
decl foo = generator {
	decl Int i = 2
	while i lt 5 {
		yield i
		i++
	}
}

for i in foo {
	print i &quot; &quot;
}

prints: '2 3 4 '

interface of foo == Generator&lt;Int&gt;
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(decl const foo
	(generator
		(decl Int i 2)
		(while (lt i 5)
			(compound
				(yield i)
				(++ i)))))

(forin i foo
	(print i &quot; &quot;))
			</programlisting>

			<programlisting>
decl foo = func(Int a, Int b) Generator&lt;Int&gt; {
	return generator {
		decl Int i = a
		while i lt b {
			yield i
			i++
		}
	}
}

for i in foo(2, 5) {
	print i &quot; &quot;
}

prints: '2 3 4 '
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
decl foo = genfunc(Int a, Int b) Int {
	decl Int i = a
	while i &lt; b {
		yield i
		i++
	}
}

for i in foo(2, 5) {
	print i &quot; &quot;
}

prints: '2 3 4 '
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
decl foo = [2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3]
decl foo = [x in L if x^2 &gt; 3]
decl foo = [x in L]
for o in [2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3] {
	println o
}

//convert to Array
Array&lt;Int&gt;([2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3])

//insert into existing collection
collection.insert([2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3])
			</programlisting>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="node.generic-function">
			<title>generic-function</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.parameter-info">parameter-info</link> parameter</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.function">function</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="process">The direction of the [parameter-info] must be &quot;in&quot;.</para>
			
			<para>Evaluates to a value with an active interface that inherits from GenericClass and one or more function interfaces. When called, the value returns the value returned from evaluating the function node.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
func larger&lt;T&gt;(T a, T b) T {
	if a lt b
		return b
	return a
}

println larger(2, 7) //prints &quot;7&quot;
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(declfirst auto larger
	(genericfunction (T) ((T a) (T b)) T
		(if (lt a b)
			(return b))
		(return a)))

(println (larger 2 7))
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.generic-interface">
			<title>generic-interface</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.parameter-info">parameter-info</link> parameter</member>
				<member><link linkend="node.interface">interface</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<para role="process">The direction of the [parameter-info] must be &quot;in&quot;.</para>
			
			<para>Evaluates to a value with an active interface that inherits from GenericClass and one or more function interfaces. When called, the value returns the value returned from evaluating the interface node.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
interface List&lt;T&gt; {
	func addFront(T)
	func addBack(T)
	func removeFront() T
	func removeBack() T
}

decl List&lt;Int&gt; list = getNumbers()
list.addFront(2)
list.addBack(3)
list.addFront(1)
println list.removeFront() //prints &quot;1&quot;
println list.removeBack() //prints &quot;3&quot;
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(declfirst auto List
	(genericinterface (T)
		(func addFront (T) void)
		(func addBack (T) void)
		(func removeFront () T)
		(func removeBack () T)))

(decl List&lt;Int&gt; list
	(getNumbers))
(list.addFront 2)
(list.addBack 3)
(list.addFront 1)
(println (list.removeFront))
(println (list.removeBack))
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.instantiate-generic">
			<title>instantiate-generic</title>
			
			<para role="xxx">Need to decide how to include type information. Type value, or type node? Write down and compare pros and cons. (Some related info in &quot;type occurrence.txt&quot;)</para>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> generic</member>
				<member>+ <link linkend="node.argument">argument</link> </member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<programlisting>
decl List&lt;Int&gt; numbers
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(decl List&lt;Int&gt; numbers)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.integer">
			<title>integer</title>
			
			<para>Base node. Evaluates to an object reference with BigInt as the active interface. The object may implement other interfaces if they do not conflict with the BigInt interface. Must not implement the LimInt interface.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
println( 789 )
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(println 789)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.interface">
			<title>interface</title>
			
			<simplelist role="layout">
				<member>* <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> inheritee</member>
				<member>* <link linkend="node.statused-member">statused-member</link> member</member>
			</simplelist>
			
			<section xml:id="node.statused-member">
				<title>statused-member</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.member-status">member-status</link> </member>
					<member><link linkend="node.interface-member">interface-member</link> member</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.member-status">
				<title>member-status</title>
			
				<para>Terminal node. Specifies one of:</para>
				
				<simplelist role="enum">
					<member>new</member>
					<member>normal</member>
					<member>deprecated</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.breeder">
				<title>breeder</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member>? <link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				</simplelist>
				
				<para>Specifies that implementations of that interface can be converted into the specified type. Or, if [interface] isn't given, that the value can be copied.</para>
				
				<para role="xxx">What is rationale for not just having an &quot;* expression breedable interface&quot; layout entry of interface nodes?</para>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.callee">
				<title>callee</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member>* <link linkend="node.parameter-info">parameter-info</link> </member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> return type</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.method">
				<title>method</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> interface</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
			
			<section xml:id="node.property">
				<title>property</title>
				
				<simplelist role="layout">
					<member><link linkend="node.identifier">identifier</link> name</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.boolean">boolean</link> writable</member>
					<member><link linkend="node.expression">expression</link> type</member>
				</simplelist>
			</section>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="node.rational">
			<title>rational</title>
			
			<para>Base node. Evaluates to an object with BigRat as the active interface. The object may implement other interfaces if they do not conflict with the BigRat interface. Must not implement the LimRat interface.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
println( 123.456 )
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(println 123.456)
			</programlisting>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="node.string">
			<title>string</title>
			
			<para>string nodes consist of text</para>
			
			<para>strings are expressions</para>
			
			<para>Base node. Evaluates to an object with interface string as the active interface. The object may implement other interfaces if they do not conflict with the string interface.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
println( &quot;this is a string&quot; )
			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>
(println &quot;this is a string&quot;)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
	</section>
</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="reserved-identikey-names">
		<title>Reserved identikey names</title>

		<para>No user-defined identikeys can be associated with these identifiers.</para>

		<simplelist>
			<member>global - Namespace identikey that refers to the scope associated with the bundle node. Defined in the global scope.</member>
			<member>std - Namespace identikey for the standard library. Defined in the global scope.</member>
			<member>true - Constant strict identikey bound to the Bool enum true member. Defined in the global scope.</member>
			<member>false - Constant strict identikey bound to the Bool enum false member. Defined in the global scope.</member>
			<member>outer - Namespace identikey that refers to the outer scope. Defined in all scopes except the global scope. Note that outer::outer may be valid, depending on which scope it appers in.</member>
			<member>inst - Namespace identikey that exposes private fields of objects created by the class node. Defined in child scopes of class nodes.</member>
			<member>std - The <link linkend="standard-library">Niviok standard library</link>. Defined in the global scope.</member>
		</simplelist>
		
		<para role="xxx">Other possibilites for the standard library: standard, system, language, and various capitalizations (Standard, System, Language) and abbreviations (std, stand, sys, lang).</para>
		
		<para role="xxx">Need to clarify somewhere (probably multiple places) that namespaces are not scopes, and that scidentres like global and std are not defined in those scopes. But note that this causes problems with e.g. outer:outer:outer. This hasn't been thought out enough yet.</para>
	</chapter>

	<chapter version="5.0" xml:id="standard-library" xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2003/XInclude">

	<title>Standard library</title>

	<para>Some new ideas the standard library might not reflect yet: Every object has 1 or more workers. Every worker implements an interface. An interface is a set of interface members. A type places restrictions on what kind of values can appear at a certain location. A cast is an explicit operation that takes a worker and a type, and returns a worker, or throws an exception. How the cast works depends on the type. A downcast is similar to a cast, but it is (or can be) an implicit operation.</para>
	
	<screen>interface Signal (formerly &quot;Exception&quot;)
	get stack Sequence&lt;String&gt;
	func push (String -&gt;)

interface Error
	inherit Signal

interface Break
	inherit Signal

interface Continue
	inherit Signal

interface Return
	inherit Signal




def ManualType any = ...
def Nullable nany = Nullable&lt;any&gt;
(same_object? nany Nullable&lt;any&gt;) =&gt; true


func if { test_val, true_callback |
	if test_val true_callback {}
}

func if { test_val, true_callback, false_callback |
	let dict = dictionary
		true : true_callback
		false : false_callback
	(dict test_val)()
}



interface Object
	#empty
	#Interfaces that don't inherit from anything else inherit from Object.

func Object() Object
	Returns a new wo-ref implementing the Object interface.
	Here, &quot;new&quot; means same_object?(Object(), any_expression_here) must always be false.

union Type
	Interface
	Nullable
	Union
	Subset
	ManualType

declfirst ManualType any = ...
	#worker is any non-null value (but note the existence of Nullable&lt;any&gt;)

declfirst ManualType void = ...
	#worker is unfaced null (can downcast from faced null)
	#Only untyped null values are allowed.
	#downcast: Returns unfaced null if worker is null. Throws if worker is not null.
	#cast: Returns unfaced null.

declfirst ManualType callable = ...
	#worker is callable (i.e. a function)

interface Interface
	get Set&lt;Interface&gt; inheritees
	get ?FunctionInfo callee
	get Dict&lt;Identifier,PropertyInfo&gt; properties
	get Dict&lt;Identifier,Set&lt;MethodInfo&gt;&gt; methods
	get Set&lt;BreederInfo&gt; breeders

interface Nullable
	get Type type
/*
	check: The worker must either: 1) be an unfaced null, or 2) be a faced null with an interface that the , or 3) match the rules of the specified type.
	can downcast: Yes if unfaced null, otherwise dependent on wrapped type.
	can cast: Yes if null, otherwise dependent on wrapped type.
	downcast/cast: If unfaced null and type is interface, returns faced null with interface as face. If unfaced null and type is not interface, returns unfaced null. If faced null, return a faced null with an interface returned by the downcast/cast specified by the type. If not null, follow rules of type.
*/

#The interface must be one of the interfaces in the members set.
interface Union
	get Set&lt;Interface&gt; members





func is?(?any worker, Type type) Bool
func can_downcast&lt;Type type&gt;(?any worker) Bool
func downcast&lt;Type type&gt;(?any worker) type
func can_cast&lt;Type type&gt;(?any worker) Bool
func cast&lt;Type type&gt;(?any worker) type
	''foo as Bar'' could be syntactic sugar for ''cast&amp;lt;Bar&gt;(foo)''
	
	#value
	123 as Int
	123 as ?Int
	123 as void #error
	
	#null
	null as Int #error
	null as ?Int
	null as void
	
	const Int o = getIntAndString()
	print( (o as String).length )

#note that these also work for Types besides ManualType
func interface_is?(Interface, Type) Bool
func determine_downcast(Interface, Type) ?Interface
func null_allowed?(Type) Bool

interface ManualType
	func interface_is?(Interface) Bool
	func determine_downcast(Interface) ?Interface
	get Bool null_allowed?

--- descriptions

-- is?
Tells whether the null or worker complies with the type.

pseudocode:
	if isNull?(worker)
		null_allowed?(type)
	else
		interface_is?(getInterface(worker), type)

-- can_downcast?

pseudocode:
	if isNull?(worker)
		null_allowed?(type)
	else
		determine_downcast(getInterface(worker), type) != null

-- downcast
If @worker is null and the type allows null, returns null. If @worker is null and the type does not allow null, throws an exception. If @worker is not null, returns @worker or a worker inherited by @worker that complies with the type. If there is no such worker, throws an exception.

pseudocode:
	if isNull?(worker)
		if not null_allowed?(type)
			throw NullException()
		null
	else
		const ?Interface face = determine_downcast(getInterface(worker), type)
		if isNull?(face)
			throw CastException()
		interface_downcast&lt;face&gt;(worker)

-- can_cast?

pseudocode:
	if isNull?(worker)
		null_allowed?(type)
	else
		determine_downcast(getRootInterface(worker), type) != null

-- cast
If @worker is null and the type allows null, returns null. If @worker is null and the type does not allow null, throws an exception. If @worker is not null, returns @worker or a worker implemented by the object associated with @worker that complies with the type. If there is no such worker, throws an exception.

pseudocode:
	if isNull?(worker)
		if not null_allowed?(type)
			throw NullException()
		null
	else
		const ?Interface face1 = determine_downcast(getInterface(worker), type)
		if not isNull?(face)
			interface_downcast&lt;face1&gt;(worker)
		else
			const ?Interface face2 = determine_downcast(getRootInterface(worker), type)
			if isNull?(face)
				throw CastException()
			interface_downcast&lt;face2&gt;(rootCast(worker))

-- interface_is?
Tells whether a worker implementing the specified interface would meet the requirements of this type.

-- determine_downcast
Of the specified interface and the interfaces inherited by it, determines which interface would meet the requirments of the type. If no such interface exists, returns null.

-- null_allowed?
Whether null is allowed by the type.





func all_false? = &lt;T&gt;{ Iterable&lt;T&gt; collection, (T -&gt; Bool) callback |
	for T t in collection
		if callback(t)
			return false
	return true
}

func all_true? = &lt;T&gt;{ Iterable&lt;T&gt; collection, (T -&gt; Bool) callback |
	for T t in collection
		if ! callback(t)
			return false
	return true
}

func any_false? = &lt;T&gt;{ Iterable&lt;T&gt; collection, (T -&gt; Bool) callback |
	! all_true?(collection, callback)
}

func any_true? = &lt;T&gt;{ Iterable&lt;T&gt; collection, (T -&gt; Bool) callback |
	! all_false?(collection, callback)
}




union FunctionInfo
	NamedFunctionInfo
	UnnamedFunctionInfo

interface NamedFunctionInfo
	get Sequence&lt;NamedParameterInfo&gt; parameters
	get Type return_type

interface UnnamedFunctionInfo
	get Sequence&lt;UnnamedParameterInfo&gt; parameters
	get Type return_type

func&lt;T&gt; each { Iterable&lt;T&gt; iter, (T -&gt; void) callback |
	for T v in iter
		callback(v)
}

func&lt;TI, TO&gt; map { Iterable&lt;TI&gt; iter, (TI -&gt; TO) callback -&gt; Sequence&lt;TO&gt; |
	const Sequence&lt;TO&gt; s()
	for TI v in iter
		s &lt;&lt; callback(v)
	s
}

func&lt;T&gt; filter { Iterable&lt;T&gt; iter, (T -&gt; Bool) callback -&gt; Sequence&lt;T&gt; |
	const Sequence&lt;T&gt; s()
	for T v in iter
		if callback(v)
			s &lt;&lt; v
	s
}</screen>
	
	<screen>def null = compound[
	var foo #declare-empty
	foo #evaluating wo-scidentre not associated with any worker
]</screen>
	
	<para role="xxx">Below is old.</para>
	
	<simplelist>
		
		<member>interface Object</member>
		<member>interface Interface</member>
		<member>... Bool</member>
		<member>interface String</member>
		<member>interface Int</member>
		<member>interface Rat</member>
		<member>interface BigInt</member>
		<member>interface BigRat</member>
		<member>interface&lt;I&gt; Generator</member>
		<member>interface Octet</member>
		<member>interface Blob</member>

		
		<member>interface&lt;I&gt; Ref</member>
		<member>interface&lt;I&gt; WeakRef</member>
		<member>interface&lt;I&gt; Array</member>
		<member>... Deque</member>
		<member>func toDeque&lt;I&gt;(Collection&lt;I&gt;) Deque&lt;I&gt;</member>
		<member>... Chain</member> 
		
		
		<member>func&lt;I&gt;(val)I cast</member>
		<member>func(val, Interface face)Bool implements?</member>

		
		<member>Bool true</member>
		<member>Bool false</member>
	</simplelist>
	
	<screen>decl Deque numbers = Deque(3, 4, 5, 9)
numbers.pushFront(2)
numbers.pushFront(1)
numbers.popBack()
println(join(numbers, &quot; &quot;)) //prints &quot;1 2 3 4 5&quot;

decl Array&lt;Int&gt; numbers2 = Array&lt;Int&gt;(10, 11, 12, 13)
decl Deque&lt;Int&gt; numbers3 = toDeque&lt;Int&gt;(numbers2)</screen>

	<screen>possible additions:

interface&lt;I&gt; Collection
interface&lt;I&gt; List
	indexed
	elements can be added to beginning and end
	dynamic array
interface&lt;I&gt; FwdChain
	forward chain, a singly-linked list
interface&lt;I&gt; Deck
	a deque with an easier name
interface Complex
	a complex number where both parts are limited to rational numbers
interface&lt;I&gt; Grid
	a 2-dimensional array
interface&lt;I&gt; Vector
	a resizable list
interface&lt;I&gt; Queue
interface&lt;I&gt; Stack
interface&lt;I&gt; Dict, SortedDict, MultDict, SortedMultDict, BiDict, SortedBiDict, MiltBiDict, SortedMultiBiDict
interface&lt;I&gt; Set, OrderdSet, MultiSet, OrderdMultiSect

func getProperty(dyn value, String propertyName) dyn
func setProperty(dyn value, String propertyName, dyn propertyValue) dyn

fixed-width/fixed-precision numbers
fixed-point integers
&quot;limited&quot; namespace
interface LimInt
interface LimRat</screen>
	
	<para role="xxx">How to differentiate between mutable and immmutable versions?</para>
	
	<screen>//T is the type of an entry in this enum
interface&lt;T : EnumEntry&gt; Enum
	inherit Collection&lt;T&gt;
	func fromName(String str) T

//an Enum where every entry has an associated value
//T is the type of an entry in this enum
//U is the type of a value of an enum entry
interface&lt;T : EnumDictEntry, U&gt; EnumDict
	inherit Enum&lt;T&gt;
	func fromValue(U val) T

interface EnumEntry
	get String name
	func equals?( EnumEntry ) Bool

//U is the type of value each entry is associated with
interface&lt;U&gt; EnumDictEntry
	inherit EnumEntry
	get U value</screen>

	<section xml:id="object.println">
		<title>println</title>
		
		<screen>interface PrintLnFace {
	call( param Stringable objs[] ) PrintLnFace
}
declfirst PrintLnFace println = ...</screen>
		
		<para role="xxx">Need some way for client code to obtain function interfaces that return themselves. For example, &quot;func(...)Self&quot; and &quot;getRecursiveFuncFace(...)&quot;. Then, the interface of println could be defined as something like &quot;func(param Stringable objs[]) Self&quot;.</para>
		
		<para role="xxx">Need to define varargs (variadic functions).</para>
		
		<para>Takes in multiple Stringable values, prints each to standard output, and returns itself.</para>
		
		<programlisting>
println( 1, &quot; &quot;, 2, &quot; &quot;, 3 ) /* call once with multiple arguments */
println(1)(&quot; &quot;)(2)(&quot; &quot;)(3) /* call several times with one argument each time */
println 1 &quot; &quot; 2 &quot; &quot; 3 /* call several times with one argument each time */
		</programlisting>
		
		<programlisting>
(println 1 &quot; &quot; 2 &quot; &quot; 3) /* call once with multiple arguments */
(((((println 1) &quot; &quot;) 2) &quot; &quot;) 3) /* call several times with one argument each time */
		</programlisting>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.activeInterface">
		<title>activeInterface</title>
		
		<screen>func activeInterface(dyn) Interface

println( activeInterface(false) == Bool ) //true</screen>
		
		<para>Returns the interface that is the active interafce of the specified value.</para>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.String">
		<title>String</title>
		
		<para>Besides downcasting to an Interface, String can also be called to produce a String.</para>
		
		<screen>func String( Collection&lt;Int&gt; unicodeCodePoints ) String</screen>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.cast">
		<title>func{I}(dyn)I cast</title>
		
		<para>The cast function returns an object cast to the specified interface, or throws a cast error. The returned object must be the same object that was passed in.</para>
		
		<programlisting>
if (foo is Bar)
	cast&lt;Bar&gt;(foo).propOfBar()
		</programlisting>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.ceil">
		<title>ceil</title>
		
		<screen>func ceil(Rat) Int</screen>
		
		<para>Finds the ceiling of the specified rational number.</para>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.floor">
		<title>floor</title>
		
		<screen>func floor(Rat) Int</screen>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.modulo">
		<title>modulo</title>
		
		<para>Finds the remainder of dividing two integers.</para>
		
		<screen>func modulo( Int dividend, Int divisor, ModuloMethod method = ModuloMethod.divisor ) Int

enum ModuloMethod {
	dividend,
	divisor,
	positive,
	negative
}</screen>
		
		<para>When one or both of dividend and divisor are negative, there could be two possible remainders, one positive and one negative. In such a case, the ModuloMethod determines which of these to return. When there is only one possible remainder, the ModuloMethod is ignored.</para>
		
		<para>The &quot;dividend&quot; option returns the remainder with the same sign as the dividend. The &quot;divisor&quot; option returns the remainder with the same sign as the divisor. The &quot;positive&quot; option returns the positive remainder. The &quot;negative&quot; option returns the negative remainder.</para>
		
		<para>This function should throw an error if divisor is 0.</para>
			

		
		<screen>modulo(15, 4, dividend) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, 4, divisor) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, 4, positive) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, 4, negative) -&gt; 3

modulo(15, -4, dividend) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, -4, divisor) -&gt; -1
modulo(15, -4, positive) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, -4, negative) -&gt; -1

modulo(-15, 4, dividend) -&gt; -3
modulo(-15, 4, divisor) -&gt; 1
modulo(-15, 4, positive) -&gt; 1
modulo(-15, 4, negative) -&gt; -3

modulo(-15, -4, dividend) -&gt; -3
modulo(-15, -4, divisor) -&gt; -3
modulo(-15, -4, positive) -&gt; 1
modulo(-15, -4, negative) -&gt; -3</screen>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.round">
		<title>round</title>
		
		<screen>func round(Rat, RoundMethod = nearest_away) Int

enum RoundMethod {
	up, //ceiling
	down, //floor
	awayFromZero,
	towardsZero, //truncation
	nearest_up,
	nearest_down,
	nearest_away, //common rounding
	nearest_towards,
	nearest_unbiased //unbiased rounding, bankers rounding
}</screen>
		
		<para>Rounds a rational number to an integer using the specified method. The nearest_* method comes in various forms to determine what to do when the rational number is exactly halfway between two integers. For all rational numbers that are not exactly halfway between two rational numbers, the nearest_* methods behave the same. The nearest_unbiased method rounds to the nearest even integer when the number is exactly halfway between two integers. (This is most commonly called bankers rounding.)</para>
		
		<screen>round(3.1) -&gt; 3
round(3.1, up) -&gt; 4

round(3.5) -&gt; 4
round(3.5, nearest_towards) -&gt; 3

round(3.9) -&gt; 4
round(3.9, nearest_towards) -&gt; 4

round(-3.1) -&gt; -3
round(-3.1, up) -&gt; -3

round(-3.5) -&gt; -4
round(-3.5, nearest_towards) -&gt; -3

round(-3.9) -&gt; -4
round(-3.9, nearest_towards) -&gt; -4

round(3.4, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 3
round(3.5, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 4
round(3.6, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 4

round(8.4, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 8
round(8.5, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 8
round(8.500000001, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 9
round(8.6, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 9</screen>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.generator">
		<title>interface generator</title>
		
		<screen>interface{I} generator
	func next() I</screen>
		
		<para>The next() method will return objects when called until it throws a GeneratorDone exception.</para>
		
		<para>Some looping constructs will automatically obtain a generator by calling the object's getValueIterator, getKeyIterator, or getPairIterator method, and call the next() method of the generator until the exception is thrown</para>
		
		<programlisting>
MyClass[] objs
for each o in objs
	o.doStuff()
		</programlisting>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.id">
		<title>func id</title>
		
		<screen>func id(obj) Int

println( id(true) )</screen>
		
		<para>Every object is associated with a constant non-negative integer. No two objects that are still accessible can have the same object number. This function returns a value, with Int as the active interface, that encodes the object number for the object associated with the given value. Two objects with non-overlapping lifetimes may have the same object id.</para>
		
		<para>Returns a different number for every object. Always returns the same number for the same object, even if that object is a part of different values (the same object cast to different interfaces).</para>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.sameObject_q">
		<title>func sameObject?</title>
		
		<para>Determines whether the two values have the same object.</para>
		
		<screen>func sameObject?(obj, obj) Bool

println( sameObject?(foo, bar) )
//same as
println( (foo as obj) == (bar as obj) )
//same as
println( id(foo) == id(bar) )</screen>
		
		<para>Tells whether the values are associated with the same object.</para>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.implements_q">
		<title>func(obj, interface)bool implements?</title>
		
		<para>Tells whether the object implements the interface, like the implements node.</para>
		
		<programlisting>
if implements(foo, Bar)
	(foo as Bar).propOfBar()
		</programlisting>
	</section>
	
	
	<section xml:id="ident.Int">
		<title>interface Int</title>
		
		<simplelist>
			
			<member>func lessThan?(Int) Bool</member>
			<member>func lessThanOrEqual?(Int) Bool</member>
			<member>func equal?(Int) Bool</member>
			<member>func greaterThanOrEqual?(Int) Bool</member>
			<member>func greaterThan?(Int) Bool</member>
			<member>func unequal?(Int) Bool</member>
			
			
			<member>Bool positive?</member>
			<member>Bool negative?</member>
			
			
			<member>func add(Int) Int</member>
			<member>func subtract(Int) Int</member>
			<member>func multiply(Int) Int</member>
			<member>func multiply(Rat) Rat</member>
			<member>func divide(Int) Rat</member>
			<member>func divide(Rat) Rat</member>
			<member>func floorDivide(Int) Int</member>
			<member>func floorDivide(Rat) Int</member>
			<member>func remainder(Int) Int</member>
			<member>Int absolute</member>
			
			
			<member>func add!(Int)</member>
			<member>func subtract!(Int)</member>
			<member>func multiply!(Int)</member>
			<member>func increment!()</member>
			<member>func decrement!()</member>
			<member>func floorDivide!(Int)</member>
			<member>func floorDivide!(Rat)</member>
			
			
			<member>func toBuiltin() Int</member>
			<member>convert Int</member> 
			<member>convert Rat</member>
			<member>convert String</member>
		</simplelist>
		
		<para>The non-mutating methods of Int should never throw for precsion reasons, i.e. they should always return an Int that fully represents the result without loss of precision. However, the mutator methods may throw a PrecisionError if the value is not capable of representing the resultant integer.</para>
		
		<para>When Niviok implementations need to determine the value of Int objects that were implemented by user code, they should call the toBuiltin method to get an Int object that was implemented by the implementation. If toBuiltin throws an error, it should raise into user code. If the returned Int is not a built-in, an error results that should extend into user code.</para>
		
		<para>The String produced by the String convertee must represent the stored integer absolutely, with no loss of precision. It may throw an error if it is incapable of producing such a representation. There are no restrictions on how the integer should be represented, although Int implementations generally should try to produce a representation that is simple and short. Implementations of Int should prefer exotic and strange representations over throwing an error. For example, implementations should prefer representing a googolplex with e.g. &quot;10E(10E100)&quot; ofer throwing an error.</para>
	</section>
		
	<section xml:id="object.BigInt">
		<title>interface BigInt</title>
		
		<para>Inherits from Int.</para>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="object.BigRat">
		<title>interface BigRat</title>
		
		<para>Inherits from Rat.</para>
	</section>

	<section xml:id="ident.Interface">
		<title>interface Interface</title>
		
		<simplelist>
			<member>get Bool fromAddition?</member>
			<member>get Set{Interface} inheritees</member>
			<member>get List{Parameters} parameters</member>
			<member>get Type returnType</member>
			<member>get List{Property} properties</member>
			<member>get List{Method} methods</member>
			<member>func add(Interface) Interface</member>
			<member>func subtract(Interface) Interface</member>
		</simplelist>
		
		<para>Implements itself.</para>
	</section>
		
	<section xml:id="object.Object">
		<title>interface Object</title>
		
		<simplelist>
			<member>Bool builtin?</member>
			<member>Bool mutable?</member>
			<member>Int number</member>
			<member>func{I} cast() I</member>
			<member>func implements? (Interface) Bool</member>
			<member>func sameObject? (Object) Bool</member>
		</simplelist>
		
		<para>These methods expose the same functionality of some of the nodes.</para>
		
		<para>The builtin? property tells whether the object is implemented by the Niviok implementation, such as for integers and strings. The implements? method tells whether the object implements a specified interface.</para>
	</section>
	
	<section xml:id="interface.rat">
		<title>interface rat</title>
		
		<simplelist>
			<member>func toInt() int</member>
			<member>func round() int</member>
			<member>func round!()</member>
		</simplelist>
		
		<para>toInt will throw if the represented value is not already an integer. round should not throw. round! modifies the represented value.</para>
	</section>

	<para role="xxx">Para between sections:</para>
	
	<para>Constant identikeys in the std namespace. The values these identikeys are bound to are immutable.</para>
	
	<simplelist>
		<member>interface InterfaceBuilder</member>
		<member>func()InterfaceBuilder CInterfaceBuilder</member>
	
		<member>func(int, interface[], interface)interface getFuncInterface</member>
		
		<member>interface{I} Iterator</member>
		
		
		<member>func{I}(:vararg)array{I} CArray</member>
		<member>func(bool[] bits, bool positive = true)int CInt</member>
		<member>func{I}(:vararg)list{I} CList</member>
		
		<member>func{I}(I)SelfGen print</member>
		<member>func{I}(I)SelfGen println</member>
	</simplelist>
	
	<section xml:id="Generator">
		<title>Generator</title>
		
		<programlisting>
generic&lt;T&gt;
interface Generator {
	func yield() T //throws a GeneratorExhausted exception (which inherits from SpecialCase) when all values have been yielded
}
		</programlisting>
	</section>
		
	
	<section xml:id="InterfaceBuilder">
		<title>InterfaceBuilder</title>
	
		<simplelist>
			<member>map{string, interface} properties</member>
			
			<member>bool alwaysImmutable?</member> 
			<member>func()interface generate</member>
		</simplelist>
		
		<para>interface interface is always immutable, so InterfaceBuilder exists to allow creating interface objects procedurally.</para>
	</section>
		
	<section xml:id="Iterator">
		<title>Iterator</title>
			
		<screen>interface{I} Iterator
	//values may change
	bool first?
	bool last?
	bool hasNext?
	bool hasPrevious?
	bool between? //iterator points between 2 items (such as after the item was removed)
	bool valid?

	//capabilities of the iterator - values should not change
	bool canMoveForward? //whether the iterator can move forward
	bool canMoveBackward? //whether the iterator can move backwards
	bool canRemove?
	bool canReplace? //whether the objects can be replaced with different objects
	bool canRead?
	bool canInsertAfter?
	bool canInsertBefore?
	bool canCompareCollection?
	bool canCompareIterator? //corresponds to equal?
	bool canComparePosition? //corresponds to before? and after?

	func moveForward()
	func moveBackward()
	func remove()
	func replace(I)
	func insertAfter(I)
	func insertBefore(I)
	func sameCollection?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	func before?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	func after?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	func equal?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	
	I value</screen>

		<para>An iterator is used to access the elements in a container. If the elements are not ordered 2-dimensionally, an 2-dimensional order must be decided for the iterator that does not change for that iterator instance. If the elements in the container are ordered 2-dimensionally, the iterator must refer the elements in that order.</para>

		<para>The equals? method returns true if both iterators are pointing to same item of the same collection. If the collection is unordered, the order the iterator moves over items must also be the same.</para>

		<para>A valid iterator either refers to an element or a position between two elements. An iterator should only refer to a position between two elements when the element the iterator currently pointed to was removed. If the iterator is not valid, or read? is false, the value property refers to null.</para>
			
		<para>An iterator only becomes invalid if:</para>
		<simplelist>
			<member>the container contains no objects</member>
			<member>the iterator is moved beyond all objects</member>
			<member>a non-supported method is called (example: moveBackward() is called on an iterator that can only move forward)</member>
		</simplelist>

		<para>If an iterator is not valid, it may be possible to revalidate it by calling next() or previous(). For example, if the iterator refers to the last object and next is called, the iterator becomes invalid, but calling previous may make the iterator valid again. Whether an iterator can be revalidated and under what circumstances the iterator is revalidated is dependant on the implementation of the iterator.</para>
			
		<para>Containers should always give iterators with the same functionality. For example, if a container, when it has three elements, gives an iterator with forward? set to true, it should also give an iterator with the property forward? set to true when it has 1, even though calling moveForward() would invalidate the iterator.</para>

		<programlisting>
Container{int} numbers;
Iterator iter = numbers.iterate();
int num = iter.value

while( iter.valid? )
	int num = iter.value
	iter.moveForward()
		</programlisting>
	</section>
		
	<section xml:id="CInterfaceBuilder">
		<title>CInterfaceBuilder</title>
			
		<para>CInterfaceBuilder, when called, returns an object that can be used to procedurally and/or dynamically create interface objects.</para>
	</section>
		
	<section xml:id="getFuncInterface">
		<title>getFuncInterface</title>
			
		<screen>func getFuncInterface (
	int templateParamCount,
	interface[] params,
	interface returnInterface,
) interface</screen>
			
		<para>Returns an interface specifying a call method with the specified number of template parameters, the specified parameters, and the specified return interface. If returnInterface is null, the interface specifies a void call method. Every time it is called with the same arguments, it must return the same object.</para>
	</section>
</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="warnings-list">
		<title>Warnings</title>
		
		<para>This is a list of warnings predefined by this specification. Agents should create other warnings whenever needed.</para>
		
		<table>
			<tbody>
				<tr>
					<th>name</th>
					<th>meaning</th>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>always null</td>
					<td>A node that will never produce a value when executed is being used as if it will sometimes produce a value. This warning is produced by the node that attempts to make use of the output, such as an assignment node, and not the node that doesn't produce. A node that will never produce a value when executed is being used as if it will produce a value. Example: The result is being assigned to an identikey or passed as an argument. This applies to node types like <link linkend="node.call">call</link> which can sometimes produce a value, if a particular instance can be determined to never produce a value. (XXX should this warning apply to using nodes like throw, break, or return as expressions?</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>no effect</td>
					<td>The output of a node that does not have side effects is not being used. For example, a member of a <link linkend="node.compound">compound</link> that is an integer node and does not appear last. The integer node would have no effect.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>unreachable</td>
					<td>Code is unreachable. Execution will never reach a particular piece of code.</td>
				</tr>
			</tbody>
		</table>
	</chapter>

	<chapter xml:id="error-handling-processing">
		<title>Error handling during processing</title>
		
		<para>If an error is found during processing, and none of the already generated nodes have been executed, all generated nodes in the entire Niviok tree must not be used for purposes beyond explaining the source of errors. Construction of the Niviok node tree may continue after errors are found. The main() function must not be called, and the members should not be exposed as a library.</para>
			
		<para>If errors occur while generating the Niviok node tree, and execution has already begun, a warning should immediately be emitted describing the error. How this warning is emitted is undefined. Generation of the Niviok node tree may continue. When execution reaches the damaged section of the tree, an error should be thrown describing the error. If execution never reaches the damaged section of the tree, the error should have no effect.</para>
	</chapter>
	
	<chapter xml:id="rationales">
		<title>Rationales</title>
		
		<para>This chapter explains the decisions behind various choices made for Niviok.</para>
		
		<section xml:id="rationale.dynamic-static-typing">
			<title>Dynamic static typing</title>
			
			<para>Dynamic static typing refers to explicitly using and enforcing type information that isn't available until runtime. The type information isn't known until runtime, but after it's known, it's enforced and can't be changed.</para>
			
			<para>An example of this is loading an interface from a library and then using obtaining values with that interface through the library. The loaded interface can be used as the type for function parameters, free identifiers, etc. So although the interface wasn't known until runtime, one the information was known, it was enforced, and the values of that interface are only accessed by ensuring they are of that interface.</para>
			
			<para>Dynamic static typing can do nothing beforehand to ensure property/method access is correct, but it can ensure that various values are of the same type. For example, consider the case where an interface is loaded from a library and bound to an identifer. Then a free identifier is declared to be of that type, and a function is declared to accept a value of that type. An implementation will known that the free identifer and the function's parameter are of the same type, so the value bound to the free identifier can safely be passed to the function. This safety could not be ensured with fully dynamic typing.</para>
			
			<para>Dynamic static typing is not as safe as fully static typing, but interfaces cannot always be known before runtime, which is a requirement for fully static typing. Therefore, Niviok should provide something to give more type safety for the cases when interfaces cannot be known until runtime. Dynamic static typing is safer than fully dynamic typing.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
Interface Foo = lib['Foo']
Interface Bar = lib['Bar']
func()Foo getFoo = lib['getFoo']
func(Bar)Int doStuff = lib['doStuff']

Foo foo = getFoo() //static typing: known beforehand that types match
foo.somthing() //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether Foo declares a 'somthing' method
doStuff(foo) //static typing: known beforehand that types don't match

---

Dyn getFoo = lib['getFoo']
Dyn doStuff = lib['doStuff']

Dyn foo = getFoo() //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether types match
foo.somthing() //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether value of foo has a &quot;somthing&quot; method
doStuff(foo) //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether types match
			</programlisting>
			
			<para>Arguments against: Interfaces should almost always be known beforehand. Dynamic static typing may be very rarely used, and could encourage bad programming.</para>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="rationale.terms">
			<title>Terms</title>
			
			<section xml:id="rationale.get-set">
				<title>get/set</title>
								
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th>term as verb</th>
							<th>term as noun</th>
							<th>good points</th>
							<th>bad points</th>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>get</td>
							<td>getter</td>
							<td>short, easy to say, easy to spell, common amoung programming languages</td>
							<td>implies the property has been taken away</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>set</td>
							<td>setter</td>
							<td>short, easy to say, easy to spell, common amoung programming languages</td>
							<td>sounds more like adding a new property than changing the value of a pre-existing property</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>access</td>
							<td>accessor</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>retrieve</td>
							<td>retriever</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>read</td>
							<td>reader</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>write</td>
							<td>writer</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>mutate</td>
							<td>mutator</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				
				<para>Additional notes:</para>
				<para>The one letter difference between &quot;get&quot; and &quot;set&quot; (and &quot;getter&quot; and &quot;setter&quot;) could cause errors more easily than if the difference were greater. Also, the noun form is slightly irregular; some people may expect &quot;geter&quot; and &quot;seter&quot; to be the noun form.</para>
			</section>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="rationale.executing-boolean-logic">
			<title>Executing boolean logic nodes</title>
			
			<para>In other languages, functions/methods that return boolean values are often chained together with short-circuiting boolean logic nodes. XOR and XNOR nodes cannot short-circuit, and thus this does not apply to them.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
list.empty? $or list.clear()
//similar to:
$if $not list.empty? : list.clear()

list.empty? $and list = getValues()
//similar to:
$if list.empty? : list = getValues()
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="executing-declaration-first">
			<title>Disallowing executing declaration-first</title>
			
			<para>Children of declaration-first nodes are executed when the scope is first created, which may involve executing an identifier associated with a variable identikey. When execution reaches a declaration-first node, the identifiers used to create the initial value assigned to the identikey may be assigned to different values. Thus, executing a declaration-first node could produce unexpected results.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
$decl Int alpha = 12345

$block {
	alpha = 9000
	println ( $decl-first Int beta = alpha ) //prints &quot;12345&quot;
}
			</programlisting>
			
			<para>In the above example, alpha is executed and assigned to beta when the scope for the block node is created. Then, 9000 is assigned to alpha. Then, the declaration-first node is executed, producing the value assigned to beta, which is 12345. A programmer may have expected beta to be bound to the current value of alpha, which is 9000.</para>
		</section>
	</chapter>

	<chapter xml:id="unsorted-outdated-stuff">
		<title>Unsorted/outdated stuff</title>

		<section xml:id="closures">
			<title>Closures</title>
			
			<para>Functions and classes (amoung others) have references to their containing scope. Identifier references in these scopes can be accessed and modified by the functions/classes.</para>
			
			<para>Copy closures create copies of specific values when a function node is executed. Modifying this copy does not modify the captured scope.</para>
			
			<programlisting>

//regular closures

func makePrinters(Int max) func()void[] {
	func()void[] printers = new func()void[]
	Int i = 1
	while i &lt;= max {
		printers &lt;&lt; func()void {
			print i + ' '
		}
		i++
	}
	return printers
}

//array of functions that have no parameters and return nothing
func()void[] printers = makePrinters(10)
for printer in printers {
	printer()
}

//output
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 

Each of the anonymous functions held a reference to the same scope where i was defined. Because i held 10 when the functions were called, each output 10.

			</programlisting>
			
			<programlisting>

//copy closures

func makePrinters(Int max) func()void[] {
	func()void[] printers = new func()void[]
	Int i = 1
	while i &lt;= max {
		printers &lt;&lt; func()void {
			copyclosure i
			print i + ' '
		}
		i++
	}
	return printers
}

//array of functions that have no parameters and return nothing
func()void[] printers = makePrinters(10)
for printer in printers {
	printer()
}

//output
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Each of the anynonymous functions held a copy of the value of i at the time the function was created.

			</programlisting>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="tree-examples">
			<title>Tree examples</title>
				
			<section xml:id="tree-example-1">
				<title>Example 1</title>
					
				<programlisting>


global
	declare-const
		identifier
			&quot;main&quot;
		expression [value] (function-definition)
			function-parameter
				identifier
					&quot;args&quot;
				expression [interface] (interface-template-instantiation)
					expression [interface-template] (identifier)
						&quot;array&quot;	
					expression [template-argument] (identifier)
						&quot;string&quot;
			expression [return-interface] (identifier)
				&quot;int&quot;
			expression (return)
				expression (integer)
					0

func main(string[] args) int
	return 0

				</programlisting>
			</section>
				
			<section xml:id="tree-example-2">
				<title>Example 2</title>
					
				<programlisting>

global (global)
	declaration (declaration &gt; function-declaration)
		name (string)
			&quot;main&quot;
		return (expression &gt; object-reference)
			name (string)
				&quot;int&quot;
		item (item &gt; return)
			value (expression &gt; integer)
				0

func main() int
	return 0

&lt;global type=&quot;global&quot;&gt;
	&lt;declaration type=&quot;function-declaration&quot;&gt;
		&lt;name type=&quot;string&quot;&gt;main&lt;/name&gt;
		&lt;return type=&quot;object-reference&quot;&gt;
			&lt;name type=&quot;string&quot;&gt;int&lt;/name&gt;
		&lt;/return&gt;
		&lt;item type=&quot;return&quot;&gt;
			&lt;value type=&quot;integer&quot;&gt;0&lt;/value&gt;
		&lt;/item&gt;
	&lt;/declaration&gt;
&lt;/global&gt;

				</programlisting>
			</section>

			<section xml:id="tree-example-3">
				<title>Example 3</title>
					
				<programlisting>

global (global)
	name-bind (name-bind)
		identifier (identifier)
			&quot;main&quot;
		expression (function-definition)
			parameter (parameter)
				interface (interface &gt; function-call)
					function (function &gt; identifier)
						&quot;array&quot;
					argument (expression &gt; identifier)
						&quot;string&quot;
				identifier (identifier)
					&quot;args&quot;
		return-interface (interface &gt; identifier)
			&quot;int&quot;
		expression (expression &gt; return)
			expression (expression &gt; literal-integer)
				0

func main(string[] args) int
	return 0

&lt;global type=&quot;global&quot;&gt;
	&lt;name-bind type=&quot;name-bind&quot;&gt;
		&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;main&lt;/identifier&gt;
		&lt;expression type=&quot;function-definition&quot;&gt;
			&lt;parameter-list type=&quot;parameter-list&quot;&gt;
				&lt;parameter type=&quot;parameter&quot;&gt;
					&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;args&lt;/identifier&gt;
					&lt;expression type=&quot;function-call&quot;&gt;
						&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;array&lt;/identifier&gt;
						&lt;argument-list type=&quot;argument-list&quot;&gt;
							&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;string&lt;/identifier&gt;
						&lt;/argument-list&gt;
					&lt;/expression&gt;
				&lt;/parameter&gt;
			&lt;/parameter-list&gt;
			&lt;return-interface type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;int&lt;/return-interface&gt;
			&lt;expression-list type=&quot;expression-list&quot;&gt;
				&lt;expression type=&quot;return&quot;&gt;
					&lt;expression type=&quot;literal-integer&quot;&gt;0&lt;/expression&gt;
				&lt;/expression&gt;
			&lt;/expression-list&gt;
		&lt;/function&gt;
	&lt;/name-bind&gt;
&lt;/global&gt;

				</programlisting>
			</section>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="get-interface">
			<title>get interface</title>
			
			<para>It's always possible to bind the interface of an object to an identifier.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
func getInterface{I}(I o) {
return I;
}

dynref o = getMysteryObj()
interface i = getInterface(o)
i o2 = o
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="obj-interface">
			<title>obj interface</title>
			
			<para>All objects automatically implement the &quot;obj&quot; interface.</para>
			
			<programlisting>
obj foo = getAnObject()
(myinterface foo) .doStuff 3
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="identifier-binding">
			<title>Binding to identifiers</title>
			
			<programlisting>int alpha</programlisting>
			<para>Declares that &quot;alpha&quot; can refer to objects that implement the &quot;int&quot; interface. alpha currently doesn't refer to anything; i.e. it refers to null.</para>
			
			<programlisting>alpha = 3</programlisting>
			<para>Creates an object that implements the int interface and makes alpha refer to it</para>
			
			<programlisting>int beta = 5</programlisting>
			<para>Declares that &quot;beta&quot; can refer to objects that implement the &quot;beta&quot; interface. Creates an object that implements the int interface. Binds the object to &quot;beta&quot;.</para>
			
			<para>Multiple identifiers can refer to the same object.</para>
			<programlisting>
obj o = getObj()
int a = o
rat b = o
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="print-println-return-interfaces">
			<title>Return interfaces of print and println</title>
			
			<para>Below, [unbound] means the interface is not bound to an identifier. However, these interfaces can be bound to identifiers and used like any user-created interface, and they have no special properties.</para>
			
			<simplelist>
				<member>func{I}(I)[unbound] print</member>
				<member>func{I}(I)[unbound] println</member>
			</simplelist>

			<screen>interface{I} Print
	func call(I) Print

interface{I} PrintLine
	func call(I) PrintLine</screen>
			
			<para>When print is called, it returns an object that implements an interface like Print. When println is called, it returns an object that implements an interface like PrintLine. Neither interface is bound to an identifier when execution begins. They are not the same interface, meaning print(1).interface == println(1).interface executes to false.</para>
			
			<screen>println 1 2 3 &quot;a&quot; &quot;b&quot; &quot;c&quot; 4.5 6.7 8.9</screen>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="adjuncts">
			<title>Adjuncts</title>
			
			<programlisting>
interface IMyInterface
	public func doStuffA()
	public func doStuffB()

class MyClass
	:implements(IMyInterface)
	...

func IMyInterface.doAB()
	this.doStuffA()
	this.doStuffB()

func testThing(ref IMyInterface arg)
	arg.doAB()

MyClass inst
testThing(inst)
			</programlisting>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="runtime-inteface">
			<title>runtime interface implementation</title>
		
			<para>With Niviok, you should be able to write a function that takes an interface (foo) and returns a function that takes an object of that interface (foo) and returns an object that implements that same interface (foo), but with an implementation that writes to a log anytime a method is called.</para>
		
			<screen>log l = Log()
foo o = Foo()
foo wrapped = wrap(o, l)
doStuffWithAFoo(wrapped)</screen>
		
			<para>Now anytime a method is called on the object, a log entry could be written.</para>
		
			<screen>func{I} wrap(I o, log l) I
objbuilder wrapper = newObjbuilder()
wrapper.implement(I)
for prop in I.props
wrapper.interfaces[I].setProp( prop.name,
func(:vararg)obj

interface i = newInterface()
i.inherit(I)
for prop in 

wrap(...) takes an interface and returns a function
wrap(foo)(...) takes a foo and returns a foo</screen>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="runtime-interface-creation">
			<title>Runtime interface creation</title>
			
			<screen>func createInterface( map{string,dyn} methods ) interface
	interface rv = newInterface()
	for (name, meth) in methods
		rv.methods.add( pair(name, meth.functionSignature) )
	return rv

func foo(int b) string
...

func bar(float c, float d) myClass
...

func baz(widget1 e, widget4 f)
...

map(string, func) table = {
&quot;methA&quot;: foo,
&quot;methB&quot;: bar,
&quot;methC&quot;: baz
}
interface myinterface = createInterface(table)

func alpha(int g) string
...

func beta(float h, float i) myClass
...

func gamma(widget1 j, widget4 k)
...

myinterface myobj = {
methA: alpha,
methB: beta,
methC: gamma
}
string str = obj.methA(3)
myClass val = obj.methB(5.5, 7.7)
obj.gamma( createWidget1(), Widget4Factory.makeOne() )</screen>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="self-return-type">
			<title>&quot;self&quot; return type</title>
			
			<screen>func(int,float)self

is the same as

interface __foo__
	func call(int,float) __foo__

func example(int num) self
	...
	
example 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 //calls the example function 10 times</screen>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="bind">
			<title>Bind</title>
			
			<screen>interface foo
	...

func bar(foo o, int num)
	...

foo fooInst = getAFoo()
bar(fooInst, 3)
(fooInst =&gt; bar) 3
func() funcy = (fooInst =&gt; bar)
funcy(3)</screen>
		
			<para>obj =&gt; func</para>
		
			<para>The &quot;=&gt;&quot; operator binds the obj to the first argument of the function. It executes to a function. Semantically this creates a function-definition with a closure of the obj and func.</para>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="classes">
			<title>Classes</title>
			
			<para>Classes produce functors that, when called, create objects. If a class implements more than 1 interface, it can declare which of the implemented interfaces is the active interface of the returned object by marking an interface as default. If no interface is marked, the active interface is obj.</para>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="noninstantiated-interface-templates">
			<title>Noninstantiated interface templates</title>
		
			<screen>interface list{I}
	readonly int count
	func pushFront(I o)
	func popFront() I

struct node{C}
	node{C} next = null
	node{C} value = null

class makeList{T}
	node{T} first
	
	interface list{T} #default //so makeList returns a list instead of an obj that has to be cast
		...

list{int} nums = makeList{int}()
nums.pushFront(3)
nums.pushFront(5)
print nums.size //2

list{string} names = makeList{string}()
names.pushFront(&quot;John&quot;)
names.pushFront(&quot;Sarah&quot;)
names.pushFront(&quot;Billy&quot;)
print names.size //3

list someList = nums
print someList.size //2
someList.pushFront(5) //error</screen>
			
			<para>someList may refer to any kind of list, such as list{foo}, list{bar}, etc, so only methods that have the same paramater and return interfaces for all list{}s can be called.</para>
		</section>

		<section xml:id="dynamic-library-loading">
			<title>Dynamic library loading</title>
		
			<para>The selectLibrary function enables gaining references to objects without knowing the nodes that created the objects.</para>
		
			<screen>interface Library
	readonly String path
	readonly String name
	readonly String version
	readonly Bool loaded?
	func key(String name) Dyn
	func get{I}(String name) I
	func load()
	func unload()

//prototype
func selectLibrary(string identifier, string version, bool load? = true) Library

---

string identifier
string version
if platform == platforms.MacOSX or platform == platforms.Windows
	identifier = &quot;libxml&quot;
	version = &quot;2.1&quot;
elif platform == platforms.Linux
	identifier = &quot;/usr/lib/libxml.so&quot;
	version = &quot;56&quot;
else
	throw Error(&quot;unsupported platform&quot;)

Library XmlLib = selectLibrary(identifier, version)

Interface XmlElement = XmlLib.get{Interface}(&quot;XmlElement&quot;)
Dyn XmlReader = XmlLib[&quot;XmlReader&quot;]

XmlElement element = XmlRead.read(&quot;foo.xml&quot;).documentElement</screen>
		</section>
		
		<section xml:id="static-typing">
			<title>Static typing</title>
			
			<para>XXX spec out static typing and demand that implementations check all typing as much as possible before running anything. Note the section on dynamic static typing.</para>
		</section>
	</chapter>
</book>