<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><title>The Niviok Programming Language Specification</title><link href="styling.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><script>
		/* hack around Gecko bug */
		function checkHash() {
			if( oldHash != document.location.hash ) {
				oldHash = document.location.hash;
				causeReflow();
			}
		}
		function causeReflow() {
			var s = document.documentElement.style;
			s.position = 'relative';
			setTimeout( function(){ s.position = ''; }, 10 );
		}
		var oldHash = document.location.hash;
		setInterval( checkHash, 100 );
	</script></head><body>
	
	<h1>The Niviok Programming Language Specification</h1>
	<h2>Niviok 1.0</h2>
	<h2>Specification Edition 1 Draft 2008-05-14</h2>
	
	
		<p>Copyright © 
			2008
			James Justin Harrell
		</p>
		
		<p>Permission is granted to use, copy, display, modify, sell, and distribute this document. This document is provided &quot;as is&quot; without warrany of any kind. In no event shall anyone be liable for any damages or other liability arising from use of this document.</p>
	
	
	<ol class="toc"><li><a href="#introduction">1. Introduction</a><ol><li><a href="#intro-basic">1.1. Basic</a></li><li><a href="#version">1.2. Version</a><ol><li><a href="#niviok-version">1.2.1. Niviok version</a></li><li><a href="#specification-version">1.2.2. Specification version</a></li><li><a href="#version-notation">1.2.3. Version notation</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#specification-scope">1.3. Scope</a></li><li><a href="#compliance">1.4. Compliance</a></li><li><a href="#executing-nodes">1.5. Executing nodes</a></li><li><a href="#definitions">1.6. Definitions</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#overview">2. Overview</a><ol><li><a href="#identifiers">2.1. Identifiers</a></li><li><a href="#identikeys">2.2. Identikeys</a></li><li><a href="#ext-namespace">2.3. ext namespace</a></li><li><a href="#builtin-numbers">2.4. Built-in numbers</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#values">3. Values</a></li><li><a href="#functions">4. Functions</a><ol><li><a href="#function-interfaces">4.1. Function interfaces</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#interfaces">5. Interfaces</a><ol><li><a href="#interface-operations">5.1. Adding and subtracting interfaces</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#special-members">6. Special members</a><ol><li><a href="#member.add">6.1. add</a></li><li><a href="#member.equals">6.2. equals?</a></li><li><a href="#member.extract">6.3. extract</a></li><li><a href="#member.insert">6.4. insert</a></li><li><a href="#member.throwDivide">6.5. throwDivide</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#scopes">7. Scopes</a></li><li><a href="#handling-declare-first">8. Handling declare-first nodes</a></li><li><a href="#nodes">9. Nodes</a><ol><li><a href="#node-terminology">9.1. Node terminology</a></li><li><a href="#tree-node-layout">9.2. Tree node layout</a></li><li><a href="#node-supertypes">9.3. Node supertypes</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node-types">10. Node types</a><ol><li><a href="#terminal-node-types">10.1. Terminal nodes</a></li><li><a href="#family-node-types">10.2. Family node types</a><ol><li><a href="#node.expression">10.2.1. expression</a></li><li><a href="#node.scope-alteration">10.2.2. scope-alteration</a></li><li><a href="#node.interface-member">10.2.3. interface-member</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#tree-node-layout-key">10.3. Tree node layout key</a></li><li><a href="#non-executable">10.4. Non-executable</a><ol><li><a href="#node.argument">10.4.1. argument</a></li><li><a href="#node.boolean">10.4.2. boolean</a></li><li><a href="#node.direction">10.4.3. direction</a></li><li><a href="#node.expose">10.4.4. expose</a></li><li><a href="#node.generic-parameter">10.4.5. generic-parameter</a></li><li><a href="#node.identikey-category">10.4.6. identikey-category</a></li><li><a href="#node.identikey-type">10.4.7. identikey-type</a></li><li><a href="#node.import">10.4.8. import</a><ol><li><a href="#node.import-attempt">10.4.8.1. import-attempt</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.worker">10.4.9. worker</a></li><li><a href="#node.member-implementation">10.4.10. member-implementation</a></li><li><a href="#node.member-identification">10.4.11. member-identification</a></li><li><a href="#node.member-type">10.4.12. member-type</a></li><li><a href="#node.nullable-type">10.4.13. nullable-type</a></li><li><a href="#node.parameter-info">10.4.14. parameter-info</a></li><li><a href="#node.parameter-impl">10.4.15. parameter-impl</a></li><li><a href="#node.plane">10.4.16. plane</a></li><li><a href="#node.using">10.4.17. using</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#non-producing-expressions">10.5. Non-producing expressions</a><ol><li><a href="#loops">10.5.1. Loops</a><ol><li><a href="#node.conditional-loop">10.5.1.1. conditional-loop</a></li><li><a href="#node.enumerator-loop">10.5.1.2. enumerator-loop</a><ol><li><a href="#node.receiver">10.5.1.2.1. receiver</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.unconditional-loop">10.5.1.3. unconditional-loop</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#control-flow-alteration">10.5.2. Control flow alteration</a><ol><li><a href="#node.break">10.5.2.1. break</a></li><li><a href="#node.continue">10.5.2.2. continue</a></li><li><a href="#node.return">10.5.2.3. return</a></li><li><a href="#node.throw">10.5.2.4. throw</a></li><li><a href="#node.yield">10.5.2.5. yield</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.declare-empty">10.5.3. declare-empty</a></li><li><a href="#node.null">10.5.4. null</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#sometimes-producing-expressions">10.6. Sometimes producing expressions</a><ol><li><a href="#node.assign">10.6.1. assign</a></li><li><a href="#node.call">10.6.2. call</a></li><li><a href="#node.cast">10.6.3. cast</a></li><li><a href="#node.compound">10.6.4. compound</a></li><li><a href="#node.conditional">10.6.5. conditional</a></li><li><a href="#node.curry">10.6.6. curry</a></li><li><a href="#node.declare-assign">10.6.7. declare-assign</a></li><li><a href="#node.declare-first">10.6.8. declare-first</a></li><li><a href="#node.identifier">10.6.9. identifier</a></li><li><a href="#node.ignore">10.6.10. ignore</a><ol><li><a href="#node.ignore-member">10.6.10.1. ignore-member</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.labeled">10.6.11. labeled</a></li><li><a href="#node.namespaced-value-identikey">10.6.12. namespaced-value-identikey</a></li><li><a href="#node.select">10.6.13. select</a><ol><li><a href="#node.case">10.6.13.1. case</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.try-catch">10.6.14. try-catch</a><ol><li><a href="#node.exception-handler">10.6.14.1. exception-handler</a></li></ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#always-producing-expressions">10.7. Always producing expressions</a><ol><li><a href="#boolean-logic">10.7.1. Boolean logic</a><ol><li><a href="#node.and">10.7.1.1. and</a></li><li><a href="#node.nand">10.7.1.2. nand</a></li><li><a href="#node.or">10.7.1.3. or</a></li><li><a href="#node.nor">10.7.1.4. nor</a></li><li><a href="#node.xor">10.7.1.5. xor</a></li><li><a href="#node.xnor">10.7.1.6. xnor</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.breed">10.7.2. breed</a></li><li><a href="#node.bundle">10.7.3. bundle</a></li><li><a href="#node.caller">10.7.4. caller</a></li><li><a href="#node.object">10.7.5. object</a></li><li><a href="#node.dictionary">10.7.6. dictionary</a><ol><li><a href="#node.dictionary-entry">10.7.6.1. dictionary-entry</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.enum">10.7.7. enum</a><ol><li><a href="#node.enum-entry">10.7.7.1. enum-entry</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.extract-member">10.7.8. extract-member</a></li><li><a href="#node.function">10.7.9. function</a></li><li><a href="#node.function-interface">10.7.10. function-interface</a></li><li><a href="#node.generator">10.7.11. generator</a></li><li><a href="#node.generic-function">10.7.12. generic-function</a></li><li><a href="#node.generic-interface">10.7.13. generic-interface</a></li><li><a href="#node.instantiate-generic">10.7.14. instantiate-generic</a></li><li><a href="#node.integer">10.7.15. integer</a></li><li><a href="#node.interface">10.7.16. interface</a><ol><li><a href="#node.breeder">10.7.16.1. breeder</a></li><li><a href="#node.callee">10.7.16.2. callee</a></li><li><a href="#node.property">10.7.16.3. property</a></li><li><a href="#node.method">10.7.16.4. method</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#node.implements">10.7.17. implements</a></li><li><a href="#node.rational">10.7.18. rational</a></li><li><a href="#node.set-property">10.7.19. set-property</a></li><li><a href="#node.string">10.7.20. string</a></li></ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#reserved-identikey-names">11. Reserved identikey names</a></li><li><a href="#standard-library">12. Standard library</a><ol><li><a href="#object.println">12.1. println</a></li><li><a href="#object.activeInterface">12.2. activeInterface</a></li><li><a href="#object.String">12.3. String</a></li><li><a href="#object.cast">12.4. func{I}(dyn)I cast</a></li><li><a href="#object.ceil">12.5. ceil</a></li><li><a href="#object.floor">12.6. floor</a></li><li><a href="#object.modulo">12.7. modulo</a></li><li><a href="#object.round">12.8. round</a></li><li><a href="#object.generator">12.9. interface generator</a></li><li><a href="#object.id">12.10. func id</a></li><li><a href="#object.sameObject_q">12.11. func sameObject?</a></li><li><a href="#object.implements_q">12.12. func(obj, interface)bool implements?</a></li><li><a href="#ident.Int">12.13. interface Int</a></li><li><a href="#object.BigInt">12.14. interface BigInt</a></li><li><a href="#object.BigRat">12.15. interface BigRat</a></li><li><a href="#ident.Interface">12.16. interface Interface</a></li><li><a href="#object.Object">12.17. interface Object</a></li><li><a href="#interface.rat">12.18. interface rat</a></li><li><a href="#Generator">12.19. Generator</a></li><li><a href="#InterfaceBuilder">12.20. InterfaceBuilder</a></li><li><a href="#Iterator">12.21. Iterator</a></li><li><a href="#CInterfaceBuilder">12.22. CInterfaceBuilder</a></li><li><a href="#getFuncInterface">12.23. getFuncInterface</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#warnings-list">13. Warnings</a></li><li><a href="#error-handling-processing">14. Error handling during processing</a></li><li><a href="#warnings">15. warnings</a></li><li><a href="#rationales">16. Rationales</a><ol><li><a href="#rationale.dynamic-static-typing">16.1. Dynamic static typing</a></li><li><a href="#rationale.terms">16.2. Terms</a><ol><li><a href="#rationale.get-set">16.2.1. get/set</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#rationale.executing-boolean-logic">16.3. Executing boolean logic nodes</a></li><li><a href="#executing-declaration-first">16.4. Disallowing executing declaration-first</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#unsorted-stuff">17. unsorted stuff</a><ol><li><a href="#closures">17.1. Closures</a></li><li><a href="#tree-examples">17.2. Tree examples</a><ol><li><a href="#tree-example-1">17.2.1. Example 1</a></li><li><a href="#tree-example-2">17.2.2. Example 2</a></li><li><a href="#tree-example-3">17.2.3. Example 3</a></li></ol></li><li><a href="#get-interface">17.3. get interface</a></li><li><a href="#obj-interface">17.4. obj interface</a></li><li><a href="#identifier-binding">17.5. Binding to identifiers</a></li><li><a href="#print-println-return-interfaces">17.6. Return interfaces of print and println</a></li><li><a href="#adjuncts">17.7. Adjuncts</a></li><li><a href="#runtime-inteface">17.8. runtime interface implementation</a></li><li><a href="#runtime-interface-creation">17.9. Runtime interface creation</a></li><li><a href="#self-return-type">17.10. &quot;self&quot; return type</a></li><li><a href="#bind">17.11. Bind</a></li><li><a href="#classes">17.12. Classes</a></li><li><a href="#noninstantiated-interface-templates">17.13. Noninstantiated interface templates</a></li><li><a href="#dynamic-library-loading">17.14. Dynamic library loading</a></li><li><a href="#static-typing">17.15. Static typing</a></li></ol></li></ol><div id="introduction">
		<h1>Chapter 1. Introduction</h1>
		
		<div id="intro-basic">
			<h2>1.1. Basic</h2>
			
			<p>Niviok is a collection of abstract nodes. Nodes that can be &quot;executed&quot; are called &quot;expressions&quot;. (Niviok does not make use of the terms &quot;statement&quot;, &quot;evaluate&quot;, or &quot;evaluation&quot;.) Some expressions &quot;produce&quot; a value when executed, and others do not.</p>
			
			<p>How Niviok nodes are represented is outside the scope of this standard. Syntax and semantics are intended to be entirely separate.</p>
			
			<p>Niviok contains some dynamic aspects, but in several ways is very static. For example, the tree of scopes (&quot;environments&quot; in some languages) and variables/constants (&quot;identikeys&quot; in Niviok) can be entirely known before runtime; identikeys cannot be declared conditionally like in highly dynamic languages such as JavaScript.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="version">
			<h2>1.2. Version</h2>
			
			<p>Each version of Niviok is described by a specification with one or more editions.</p>
			
			<div id="niviok-version">
				<h3>1.2.1. Niviok version</h3>
			
				<p>Each version of Niviok is identified by a major version number and a minor version number, both integers. Each new version that is backwards compatible with the previous version increments the minor version number by one. Each new version that is not bacwards comptable with the previous version increments the major version number by one and resets the minor version number to 0.</p>
			</div>
			
			<div id="specification-version">
				<h3>1.2.2. Specification version</h3>
				
				<p>Each edition of a specification describing a particular version of Niviok is identified by an integer. This edition number starts at one and is incremented by one for each additional edition.</p>
				
				<p>A document that is intended to become an edition is a draft. A finalized edition is no longer in the draft stage. Each draft is identified by the date on which it was published.</p>
				
				<p>Newer editions should serve only to better describe a particular version of Niviok, not to modify that version of Niviok. Newer editions should not attempt to correct problems with Niviok, only errors in describing that version of Niviok.</p>
			</div>
			
			<div id="version-notation">
				<h3>1.2.3. Version notation</h3>
				
				<p>A version of Niviok may be represented as &quot;Niviok X.Y&quot; where X is the major version number and Y is the minor version number.</p>
				
				<p>A finalized specification for Niviok may be represented as &quot;Niviok X.Y Edition A&quot; where A is the edition number.</p>
				
				<p>A draft of an edition may be represented as &quot;Niviok X.Y Edition A Draft YYYY-MM-DD&quot; where YYYY-MM-DD is the date on which the draft was published, represented as specified by ISO 8601.</p>
				
				<p>Example: Niviok 2.3 Edition 4 Draft 2008-01-31</p>
			</div>
		</div>
		
		<div id="specification-scope">
			<h2>1.3. Scope</h2>
			
			<p>This document defines Niviok node types, but not how to represent instances of them.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="compliance">
			<h2>1.4. Compliance</h2>
			
			<p>This specification provides a definition of compliance. Other definitions of compliance may exist outside of this specification, but to be compliant as defined by this specification, these requirements must be met.</p>
			
			<p>For an implementation to be &quot;base compliant&quot;, it must meet all the &quot;must&quot; requirements listed in this spec. If this spec says an implementation &quot;must&quot; do something, the implementation will not be considered base compliant according to this specification if it does not do it.</p>
			
			<p>Above base compliance, there are further levels of compliance. Each correct implementation of a &quot;should&quot; requirement increases the compliance level, and each failure to implement a &quot;should&quot; requirement decreases the compliance level. Two different compliance levels can only be compared if one is a subset of the other.</p>
			
			<p>For example, consider an implementation Alpha that meets all the &quot;must&quot; requirements and three of the the &quot;should&quot; requirements, and an implementation Beta that meets all the &quot;must&quot; requirements and five of the &quot;should&quot; requirements. If Beta does not meet the three &quot;should&quot; requirements that Alpha meets, Aplha is not a subset of Beta, so it cannot be said that Beta is more compliant than Alpha. But if Beta meets the same three &quot;should&quot; requirements as Alpha (in addition to the other two), then Alpha is a subset of Beta, so it can be said that Beta is more compliant than Alpha.</p>
			
			<p>This specification also has &quot;encourgements&quot;. These encouragements are considered good ideas by the specficiation author(s), but may not always be appropriate or may not be necessary for interoperability. Complying with these encouragements does not increase an implementation's compliance.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="executing-nodes">
			<h2>1.5. Executing nodes</h2>
			
			<p>No node besides the bundle node can be executed directly. All other nodes must only be executed when required by the execution instructions of another node, or as required to call a callee/method (such as when calling a value created by a function node). ((XXX clarify execution through calling)) Because values can only be created, directly or indirectly, by executing the bundle node, and because all node execution instructions only every instruct to execute child nodes, all node execution occurs as a result of executing the root bundle node.  All Niviok nodes that are executed in any way must be part of a complete Niviok node tree, which means having an bundle node as the root node.</p>
			
			<p>Note: A bundle might not have a main function. It might just expose its members, such as for scripting or a library.</p>
			
			<p>interpreted:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>a bundle representation is parsed to extract a tree of Niviok nodes</li>
				<li>libraries are loaded and linked</li>
				<li>tree is processed</li>
				<li>optimization</li>
				<li>execution of the planes' declaration-first nodes</li>
				<li>execution of the function bound to &quot;main&quot; attached to the bundle node's scope, which may return an exit status</li>
				<li>returning exit status, or 0 if none specified</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>runtime compilation:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>a bundle representation is parsed to extract a tree of Niviok nodes</li>
				<li>libraries are loaded and linked</li>
				<li>tree is processed</li>
				<li>optimization</li>
				<li>tree translated to bytecode and/or machine code</li>
				<li>execution of bytecode and/or machine code, which produces an exit status</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>beforehand compilation:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>a bundle representation is parsed to extract a tree of Niviok nodes</li>
				<li>static libaries are loaded</li>
				<li>information about shared libraries is obtained</li>
				<li>tree is processed</li>
				<li>optimization</li>
				<li>tree translated to bytecode and/or machine code and stored</li>
				<li>code is loaded</li>
				<li>shared libraries are loaded and linked</li>
				<li>processing</li>
				<li>execution of bytecode and/or machine code, which produces an exit status</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>This spec should define how to:</p>
			<ul>
				<li>process a bundle (a valid tree of Niviok nodes with a bundle node as the root node)</li>
				<li>execute nodes of a processed tree</li>
				<li>execute a bundle</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Implementations that aren't interpreters should produce equivalent behavior when being executed.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="definitions">
			<h2>1.6. Definitions</h2>
	
			<dl>
				
					<dt>Niviok agent</dt>
					<dt>agent</dt>
					<dd>An implementation of the Niviok language. Could be a source interpreter, a bytecode intepreter, a bytecode compiler, a machine code compiler, etc. If it recognizes the semantics of what it's running, and follows the rules of this document, it could be called a Niviok agent. Each agent should define what representations it supports.</dd>
				
			
				
					<dt>expression</dt>
					<dd>Nodes that can be executed.</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>object</dt>
					<dd>A collection of data that holds state. Created by a class. Only the class that created it can access an object's state. Values are associated with objects.</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>identikey</dt>
					<dd>bound to one or more values. An identifier in a certain scope is associated with an identikey.</dd>
				
			
				
					<dt>value</dt>
					<dd>Associated with an object and an interface implementation, except for the null value, which is associated with nothing or associated with an interface</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>active interface implementation</dt>
					<dd>the interface implementation a value is directly associated with</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>active interface</dt>
					<dd>the interface that the active interface implementation is associated with</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>global scope</dt>
					<dd>the scope of the bundle node. a bundle node has one and only one scope each time the bundle is executed</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>element</dt>
					<dd>A value stored in a container.</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>member</dt>
					<dd>A callee, property, method, or conversion of an interface.</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>method</dt>
					<dd>A member function of an interface.</dd>
				
			</dl>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="overview">
		<h1>Chapter 2. Overview</h1>
		
		<p>Niviok is represented by a node tree. The way this node tree is represented is not covered in this specification. This specification explains what kind of node tree a representation can represent, the meaning of the nodes in a Niviok node tree, and how to execute the node tree.</p>
		
		<p>This node tree has scopes attached at various places. These scopes contain identikeys that are bound to namespaces and values.</p>
		
		<div id="identifiers">
			<h2>2.1. Identifiers</h2>
			
			<dl>
				
					<dt>identifier</dt>
					<dd>sequence of words, with an optional ending exclamation mark or question mark</dd>
				
				
					<dt>word</dt>
					<dd>sequence of Unicode characters, where each Unicode character is a letter or an Arabic numerical digit</dd>
				
				
					<dt>letter</dt>
					<dd>member of an alphabet, abjad, abugida, syllabary, or logogram</dd>
				
			</dl>
		
			<p>Because identifiers are defined in terms of Unicode characters, letters are case sensitive wherever Unicode defines an uppercase and lowercase character for the same letter. Control characters, surrogates, whitespace characters, punctuation marks, and combining characters are not letters. This specification does not specify all characters that do or do not qualify as letters, but it does list some characters that must be recognized a certain way.</p>
			
			<p>Arabic numerical digits: (complete)</p>
			<pre>0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9</pre>
			
			<p>letters: (incomplete)</p>
			<pre>a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z</pre>
			
			<p>not letters: (incomplete)</p>
			<pre>0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 ` ~ ! @ # $ % ^ &amp; * ( ) { } [ ] / ? = + \ | - _ ' &quot; , &lt; &gt; .</pre>
			
			<p>Examples of how identifiers might be represented:</p>
			<code xml:space="preserve">do some stuff
XML_HTTP_request
we\are\finished?
mutate`this`thing!</code>
		</div>
			
		<div id="identikeys">
			<h2>2.2. Identikeys</h2>
			
			<p>An identikey is associated with a scope, an identifier, and zero or more values. An identikey may place restrictions on what values in can be associated with. It may be mutable so that what values it is associated with can change, or immutable so that in cannot be reassociated with different values.</p>

			<p>Every scope is assocciated with zero or more identikeys. Identikeys associated with the same scope must each be associated with a different identifier.</p>

			<p>When an identifier node is executed, every identikey in the scope the identifier node resides in is checked to see if the identikey is associated with an equivalent identifier. If it is, the value produce by executing the identifier node is obtained from the identikey. The identifier node execution process moves up through the scope tree (not to be confused with the scope formula tree) looking for an identikey associated with an equivalent identifier.</p>
			
			<pre>dyn foo = 123
foo = &quot;bar&quot;
foo = getSomething()

auto foo = getSomething()

Int foo
foo = 2
foo = 89

func foo

func Int foo //bound functions must return an Int</pre>
			
			
			<dl>
				
					<dt>namespace</dt>
					<dd>cannot be executed</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>dynamic</dt>
					<dd>any value</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>automatic</dt>
					<dd>interface taken from first value bound to it, then behaves like strict</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>strict</dt>
					<dd>all values bound to it must have the specified interface as a downcast-able interface</dd>
				
				
				
					<dt>function</dt>
					<dd>any value with a function interface as the active interface, or any value with a function interface as the active interface that specifies the specified return interface</dd>
				
			</dl>
			
			<p>These identikey types come in constant and variable forms:</p>
			<ul>
				<li>automatic</li>
				<li>strict</li>
				<li>function</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Dynamic identikeys are always variable.</p>
			
			<p>A function identikey can be bound to multiple functions (objects that implement a function interface; xxx link) at the same time. A function identikey can never be bound to multiple functions with the same interface.</p>
			
			<p>If the value does not implement the interface of the identifier, a cast error results (doesn't apply to dyn).</p>
			
			<p>If a value has multiple callees, the active interface is not a function interface, and thus it cannot be bound to a function identikey. The value must be cast to each function interface, and each resulting value bound individually to the function identikey.</p>

			<p>Overloading an identifier means binding multiple object references to it.</p>

			<p>Const identikeys can never be unbound from what they're bound to. Function, strict, and automatic identikeys can be const.</p>
			
			
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">interface Foo
	func fooMeth()

interface Bar
	func barMeth()

Dyn obj = getFoo()
obj.fooMeth()
obj = getBar()
obj.barMeth()</code>

			<code xml:space="preserve">dyn foo //same as: dyn foo = null
foo = getBar()
foo.barProp
foo = 3
foo.minus(5)
foo = &quot;test&quot;
foo.toUpperCase()
foo = CMyClass()
foo.myClassProp
foo = cast {BazInterface} alpha
foo.bazProp
foo = cast {MazInterface} alpha
foo.mazProp
foo = cast {GazInterface} alpha
foo.gazProp
(BazInterface foo) .bazProp
(MazInterface foo) .mazProp</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="ext-namespace">
			<h2>2.3. ext namespace</h2>
			
			<p>Unofficial features of Niviok should appear in the &quot;extension&quot; namespace when possible. Implementations do not have to recognize extensions or support them, although they are encouraged to at least recognize them in order to give more useful error messages.</p>
			
			<p>Normal library functions that do not portray any special action not possible with normal Niviok code should not appear in the &quot;extension&quot; namespace.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">import atExit from extension
atExit.addListener(myfunc)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="builtin-numbers">
			<h2>2.4. Built-in numbers</h2>
			
			<p>The built-in implementations of the Int and Rat interfaces must be able to handle numbers of an arbitrary complexity. Built-in libraries should handle numbers of an arbitrary complexity. Niviok implementations must not ever introduce rounding errors or otherwise introduce numerical errors without being explicitly told that such errors may occur.</p>
			
			<p>For example, pow(10, pow(10,100)), must correctly return an Int object reference that accurately represents a googolplex, and must be able to perform operations on this number with perfect accuracy.</p>
			
			<p>Implementations may throw errors when they are unable to perfectly represent a number. Implementations must not silently introduce errors. This is the only alternative to perfectly representing the number.</p>
			
			<p>For example, if the implementation was directed by user code to print a googolplex without using scientific notation (i.e. a &quot;1&quot; followed by a googol &quot;0&quot;), the implementation may throw an error specifying that it is unable to create such a representation.</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="values">
		<h1>Chapter 3. Values</h1>
		
		<p>Values are associated with an object and an interface implementation.</p>
		
		<p>Objects hold which is used by the interface implementation. This state can only be accessed or modified by interface implementations that they object was intented to hold state for. Objects have an ID that never changes. Each interface implementation consists of the implementation of the members of that interface.</p>
		
		<p>This specification may speak of values implementing interfaces. In these cases, what is actually refered to is whether the interface implementation the value is associtiated with is in a tree where one of the interface implementations is an implementation of that interface. The value itself does not actually implement any interfaces.</p>
		
		<p>Interface implementations form a tree. Multiple interface implementations in the same tree can implement the same iterface. When a value has an active interface that has multiple implementations, the interface implementation that is used when the value is accessed is the interface implementation that the vaule is associated with.</p>
	</div>
	
	<div id="functions">
		<h1>Chapter 4. Functions</h1>
		
		<p>Functions are just values with an active interface that defines callees. Functions can be &quot;called&quot;. Functions can have a return interface and parameters. Parameters have an interface and an optional default value.</p>
		
		<div id="function-interfaces">
			<h2>4.1. Function interfaces</h2>
			
			<p>XXX this needs a lot of work</p>
			
			<p>Function interfaces implement FunctionInterface instead of Interface and inherit from Function. FunctionInterface simply inherits from Interface and defines no new members. Function interfaces declare a callee and an &quot;apply&quot; method that hides the members of the Function interface.</p>
			
			<pre>interface Function
	callee(dyn[] params) dyn
	func apply(dyn[] arguments) dyn //actually takes an array
	func bind(dyn[] params) dyn
	func call(dyn[] params) dyn
	func curry(dyn[] params) dyn
	get List&gt;Parameter&gt; parameters
	get Bool return?
	get nullable Interface returnInterface

all function interfaces
	inherit Function
	callee(...) ...
	func apply(dyn[] params) ...
	func call(...) ...

For example, for func(Int a, Rat b, String c) Bool :

interface (func(Int a, Rat b, String c) Bool)
	inherit Function
	callee(Int a, Rat b, String C) Bool
	func apply(dyn[] params) Bool
	func call(Int a, Rat b, String C) Bool
	get parameters returns List {
		Parameter { &quot;a&quot;, Int },
		Parameter { &quot;b&quot;, Rat },
		Parameter { &quot;c&quot;, String } }
	get return? returns true
	get returnInterface returns Bool</pre>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="interfaces">
		<h1>Chapter 5. Interfaces</h1>
		
		<p>Interfaces define a means of interacting with an object's state. Interfaces declare that implementations will be able to provide object references with specified interfaces when asked for the object reference bound to identifiers specified by the interface and/or that implementations will be able to bind object references with specified interfaces to specified identifiers. Methods are a type of property. Methods are callable and cannot be assigned, only retrieved.</p>
		
		<p>Interfaces cannot inherit in a circle. (E.g., interface A cannot inherit interface B if interface B inherits interface A.) Interfaces cannot inherit from themselves. (However, interfaces created by instantiating values created from generic-interface nodes should not throw errors if the interface tries to inherit itself. Instead, the error should be silently ignored. This is to allow generic interfaces to inherit other forms of themselves.) Interfaces that do not explicitly inherit any interfaces, should implicitly inherit Object. Therefore, all interfaces inherit from Object, either directly or indirectly.</p>
		
		<p>Interfaces can declare that properties are &quot;get only&quot;, &quot;set only&quot;, or &quot;get and set&quot;.</p>
		
		<p>Interface member functions can have default values. This differs from a class with abstract members because interfaces cannot have any private members, so these default functions can not store or extract state in the object. These functions are only intended to call other member functions or throw errors.</p>
		
		<p>There are two kinds of interfaces: object interfaces (Interface) and function interfaces (FuncInterface). Object interfaces define properties and methods. Function interfaces define parameters and a return type. An interface cannot be a function interface and an object interface, though an object interface can have call methods that allow implementations to be used like functions. A function interface can be wrapped to an object interface with a single call method.</p>
		
		<p>Interface callees and members may refer to the interface. This is useful when an interface wants to define a method that returns an object reference with itself as the active interface. For generic interfaces, it is also possible to refer to the generic template.</p>
		
		<code xml:space="preserve">interface Int
	func power(Self) Self
	r Self timesTwo

//some representations may be able to translate the below example as well

iterface Int
	func power(Int) Int
	r Int timesTwo

//note that the interface node will have no knowledge of the identifier it is being bound to

//generics:

interface&lt;T&gt; Print
	callee(T) Self

Print&lt;Int&gt; print = getIntPrinter()
print(3)(5)(8) //the print callee returns a Print&lt;Int&gt; object reference

//refering to Generic interface

interface&lt;T&gt; Print
	callee(T) GenericSelf

Print print = getGenericPrinter()
print &lt;Int&gt;(3) &lt;String&gt;(&quot;foo&quot;) &lt;Rat&gt;(1.23)

//some representations may also allow:
print 3 &quot;foo&quot; 1.23</code>
		
		<div id="interface-operations">
			<h2>5.1. Adding and subtracting interfaces</h2>
			
			<p>Interfaces can be added together to produce other interfaces. How this addition occurs depends on whether the operands were produce through addition, and the inherited interfaces of the operands.</p>
			
			<p>If an interface is &quot;fromAddition&quot;, it was produced through addition and/or subtract. The <a href="#ident.Interface">Interface interface</a> exposes this information as a property.</p>
			
			<p>Interfaces produced from addition don't define any members themeselves; they only inherit from other interfaces.</p>
			
			<p>No interface can inherit from an interface that is fromAddition. When a fromAddition interface is an operand of interface addition, the inheritees of the fromAddition interface are copied into the produced interface, but the produced interface does not inherit from the fromAddition operands.</p>
			
			<p>No interface that is fromAddition can inherit from a single interface. When subtracting from a fromAddition interface, and the produced interface would have otherwise only inherited from a single interface, the produced interface is actually that single interface that it would have inherited from.</p>
			
			<pre>interface A
	fromAddition = false

interface B
	fromAddition = false

interface C
	fromAddition = true

interface D
	fromAddition = true

interface A+B
	inherit A
	inherit B

interface A+C
	inherit A
	C's inheritees (doesn't inherit from C)

interface A+D
	inherit A
	D's inheritees (doesn't inherit from D)

interface B+C
	inherit B
	C's inheritees (doesn't inherit from C)

interface B+D
	inherit B
	D's inheritees (doesn't inherit from D)

interface C+D
	C's inheritees (doesn't inherit from C)
	D's inheritees (doesn't inherit from D)

(A+B)-B must be A, not a fromAddition interface that inherits only from A.

consider this expression:
	(A+B+C)-(B+C)
if:
	* C is fromAddition
	* A and B are not fromAddition
	* C inherits from C1, C2, and C3
then the expresison is equal to:
	(A+B+C1+C2+C3)-(B+C1+C2+C3)
	(A+B+C1+C2+C3)-B-C1-C2-C3
	A</pre>

			<p>xxx ENSURE ORDER DOESN'T MATTER</p>
			
			<p>Addition with operands A and B:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>Create an interface, PRODUCT, where fromAddition is true.</li>
				<li>If A is fromAddition, copy the inheritees of A to PRODUCT. If A is not fromAddition, add A as an inheritee to PRODUCT.</li>
				<li>If B is fromAddition, copy the inheritees of B to PRODUCT. If B is not fromAddition, add B as an inheritee to PRODUCT.</li>
				<li>If PRODUCT has only one inheritee, produce that inheritee. Otherwise, produce PRODUCT.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>Note: An example of when PRODUCT would only have one inheritee from addition is when an interface that is not fromAddition is added to itself. i.e. A + A = A</p>
			
			<p>Subtraction with operands A and B:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>If A is not fromAddition, throw an error.</li>
				<li>Copy A as PRODUCT. (i.e. Copy A. We'll refer to this copy as PRODUCT.)</li>
				<li>If B is fromAddition, remove every inheritee of B from the inheritees of PRODUCT. If any of the inheritees of B is not an inheritee of PRODUCT, throw an error.</li>
				<li>If B is not fromAddition, remove B from the inheritees of PRODUCT. If B is an inheritee of PRODUCT, throw an error.</li>
				<li>If PRODUCT has only one inheritee, produce that inheritee. If PRODUCT does not have any inheritees, throw an error. Otherwise, produce PRODUCT.</li>
			</ol>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="special-members">
		<h1>Chapter 6. Special members</h1>
		
		<p>Some identifiers can only be bound to certain types of properties and methods, and have a predefined meaning. Thus, the semantics of a member with one of these identifiers is already predefined by this specification.</p>
		
		<p>Many of these special predefined members come in mutating and non-mutating forms. In these cases, the mutating form modifies the object and returns nothing while the non-mutating form returns a copy of the object with the mutation.</p>
		
		<p>Implementations must prevent identifiers from being bound to other types. Implementations are encouraged to provide shortcuts for accessing/using these members. Some examples in this section show a possible usage of the methods with and without shortcuts.</p>
		
		<p>add, subtract, multiply, divide, add!, subtract!, multiply!, divide!, equals?, lessThan?, lessThanOrEqual?, equal?, greaterThanOrEqual?, greaterThan?, unequal?, remainder, remainder!, floorDivide, floorDivide!, power, power!, absolute, absolute!, positive?, negative?, concat, concat!, remove, remove!</p>
		
		<div id="member.add">
			<h2>6.1. add</h2>
			
			<pre>func add(Self) Self</pre>
			<pre>func add!(Self)</pre>
			
			<p>Inserts an object into a container, joins data together, sends an object to something, etc. This method should only be used when order is not significant, such as when adding integers. When order is significant, such as when concatenating strings, the <a href="#member.insert">insert method</a> would be more appropriate.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">Int a = 1.add(2)
a.add!(3)

Int a = 1 + 2
a += 3</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="member.equals">
			<h2>6.2. equals?</h2>
			
			<pre>func equals?(Self o) Bool</pre>
			
			<p>Tells whether the owner value and the argument value both have state for the interface that, from the outside, appears the same.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">if( a == b )
	print &quot;they equal each other&quot;</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="member.extract">
			<h2>6.3. extract</h2>
			
			<p>
				<pre>func extract!() Foo</pre>
				Throws if there is nothing to extract.
			</p>
			
			<p>
				<pre>func extract!(out Foo) Bool</pre>
				Returns false if there is nothing to extract.
			</p>
			
<code xml:space="preserve">println container.extract!()
while container &gt;&gt; obj
	println obj</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="member.insert">
			<h2>6.4. insert</h2>
			
			<pre>func insert(Self) Self</pre>
			<pre>func insert!(Self)</pre>
			
			<p>Inserts an object into a container, joins data together, sends an object to something, etc. This method should only be used when order is significant, such as when concatenating strings. When order is not significant, such as when adding integers, the <a href="#member.add">add method</a> would be more appropriate.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">String a = &quot;foo&quot;.insert(&quot;bar&quot;)
a.insert!(&quot;gaz&quot;)

String a = &quot;foo&quot; &amp; &quot;bar&quot;
a &lt;&lt; &quot;gaz&quot;</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="member.throwDivide">
			<h2>6.5. throwDivide</h2>
			
			<pre>func throwDivide(Int) Int</pre>
			<pre>func throwDivide(Rat) Int</pre>
			<pre>func throwDivide!(Int)</pre>
			<pre>func throwDivide!(Rat)</pre>
			
			<p>Throws an error if the result is not an integer.</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="scopes">
		<h1>Chapter 7. Scopes</h1>
		
		<p>Scopes consist of a collection of identikeys, and unless it is the scope of the bundle node, an association with a parent scope. Scopes form a hierarchy. When identifier nodes are executed, the current scope is searched for an identikey that is associated with that identifier. If one is not found, that scope's parent scope is searched, and so on, until a matching identikey is found. If such an identikey cannot be found, an error results.</p>
		
		<p>When execution enters a node that &quot;has scope&quot;, before executing that node, all contained declare-first descendant nodes that do not have a closer &quot;with scope&quot; ancestor node, are handled according to <a href="#handling-declare-first">this section</a>.</p> 
	</div>
	
	<div id="handling-declare-first">
		<h1>Chapter 8. Handling declare-first nodes</h1>
		
		<p class="xxx">Rename this section to something like &quot;entering node that has scope&quot; or &quot;creating new scope&quot;?</p>
		
		<p>This section specifies the actions that must take place when execution first reaches a node that &quot;has scope&quot;.</p>
		
		<ol class="exec">
			<li>Let scopeNode be the node that &quot;has scope&quot; that execution just reached, i.e., the node that lead to this process being performed.</li>
			<li>Let nodeList be an ordered list of all declare-first nodes that:
				<ul>
					<li>are descendants of scopeNode, and</li>
					<li>do not have an ancestor node that:
						<ul>
							<li>&quot;has scope&quot; or &quot;has closure&quot;, and</li>
							<li>is a descendant of scopeNode</li>
						</ul>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</li>
			<li>Let listCount be the number of elements in nodeList.</li>
			<li>Let thisScope be a new scope.</li>
			<li>Add the identikeys specified by the nodes in nodeList to thisScope.</li>
			<li>Let currentNode be the first node in nodeList. If nodeList is empty, end this process and begin execution of scopeNode with thisScope as the associated scope.</li>
			<li>Begin executing the [value] member of currentNode.
				<ul>
					<li>If execution needs to evaluate an identikey created by this process, and the [value] member of the declare-first node associated with that identikey has not yet been evaluated and the product assigned to that identikey, pause the execution of this [value] member.</li>
					<li>If execution completes successfully, assign the product to the associated identikey, and remove currentNode from nodeList.</li>
				</ul>
			</li>
			<li>Set currentNode to the next node in nodeList and go to step 6. (If currentNode was removed, the next node would be the node that followed currentNode when currentNode was in the list.) If there is no next node, continue to the next step.</li>
			<li>If the number of elements in nodeList is equal to listCount, a cyclical dependency likely exists, where two or more expressions rely on the result of each other to execute. In this case, throw an error. If the number of elements in nodeList is not equal to listCount, set listCount to the number of elements in nodeList and go to step 5.</li>
		</ol>
		
		<pre>Example 1 of a cyclical dependency:

declfirst a = b + 2
declfirst b = a + 3

Example 2 of a cyclical dependency:

declfirst a = b + 2
declfirst b = c + 3
declfirst c = d + 4
declfirst d = e + 5
declfirst e = a + 6

Example 1 of a non-cyclical dependency:

declfirst a = b + 2
declfirst b = c + 3
declfirst c = d + 4
declfirst d = e + 5
declfirst e = 6

Example 2 of a non-cyclical dependency:

declfirst func foo = func() {
	bar()
}

declfirst func bar = func() {
	foo()
}</pre>
	
	<p>Concerning the last example: When one of these functions is called, infinite recursion occurs (negating intervention by the agent), but no such cycle is involved in just executing the function nodes. This is because the calls to foo and bar are not executed when the function nodes are executed.</p>
	</div>
	
	<div id="nodes">
		<h1>Chapter 9. Nodes</h1>
	
		<p>Niviok code is represented by a tree of nodes. How this tree and its nodes are represented is outside the scope of this specification. Many means may exist of representing a Niviok tree.</p>

		<p>Nodes are either base nodes or tree nodes. Tree nodes only contain other nodes, and their entire meaning is derived from their child nodes. Base nodes do not contain any other child nodes, and must is some way encode their meaning themselves.</p>
		
		<p>When a node has multiple child nodes with equivalent meaning, the order of those child nodes is significant, so their order must be specified by some means. The order of nodes of different meaning in relation to each other is not significant, and must not have any observable side effects.</p>
		
		<p>The child nodes of tree nodes are sometimes executed in order, such as expressions in blocks and arguments in function calls. This means the order of the child nodes is sometimes significant and thus should always be preserved.</p>
			
		<p>How ordering is represented has no effect on the semantics (left-to-right, numbered, linked list, etc) as long as there is a specified order. Each representation should specify how nodes are ordered.</p>
		
		<p>Node type names are nouns or noun phrases. XXX find correct English terminology</p>
			
		<div id="node-terminology">
			<h2>9.1. Node terminology</h2>
			
			<p>If a node can contain other nodes, it is a tree node. If a node is contained directly inside another node, the inner node is the child of the outer node, and the outer node is the parent of the inner node. If a node is contained inside another node, but not directly, the inner node is the descendant of the outer node, and the outer node is the ancestor of the inner node.</p>
			
			<p>Expressions can be executed. When executed, they may perform some kind of action; e.g. they can have side effects. Expressions may produce a value when executed.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="tree-node-layout">
			<h2>9.2. Tree node layout</h2>
			
			<p>The number, type, and order of a tree nodes children is determined by the tree node's layout.</p>
		</div>
	
		<div id="node-supertypes">
			<h2>9.3. Node supertypes</h2>
		
			<p>Where the layout for a tree node specifies that a child node is an expression, that child node can be any expression.</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="node-types">
	<h1>Chapter 10. Node types</h1>

	<p>This chapter describes the various types of nodes. A node type is either a family, tree, or terminal node type. A family node type is a collection of node types. A tree node is a node that is composed of other nodes. Tree nodes do not directly encode any data themselves. The nodes a tree node type contains is specified by the tree node's layout. When the a layout specifies the type of a child node is that of a family node type, the type of the child that takes that place must be in the collection of that family node type. A terminal node encodes data directly and does not contain other nodes.</p>
	
	<div id="terminal-node-types">
		<h2>10.1. Terminal nodes</h2>
		
		<p>These node types do not contain child nodes, and are thus the only nodes that must encode information themselves (as opposed to containing child nodes which together provide information).</p>

		
		<ul><li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a></li><li><a href="#node.direction">direction</a></li><li><a href="#node.identikey-category">identikey-category</a></li><li><a href="#node.member-type">member-type</a></li><li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a></li><li><a href="#node.integer">integer</a></li><li><a href="#node.rational">rational</a></li><li><a href="#node.string">string</a></li></ul>
	</div>
	
	<div id="family-node-types">
		<h2>10.2. Family node types</h2>
		
		<div id="node.expression">
			<h3>10.2.1. expression</h3>
			
			<p>Any node type specified directly in one the following listed sectionsis an expression node.  (Excludes node types specified in the sections of other node types.) Expression nodes can be executed, and may produce values.</p>
			
			<ul class="family-members">
				<li><a href="#non-producing-expressions">Non-producing Expressions</a></li>
				<li><a href="#sometimes-producing-expressions">Sometimes producing expressions</a></li>
				<li><a href="#always-producing-expressions">Always producing expressions</a></li>
			</ul>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.scope-alteration">
			<h3>10.2.2. scope-alteration</h3>
			
			<p>This family node type includes these types:</p>
			
			<ul class="family-members">
				<li><a href="#node.using">using</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.expose">expose</a> </li>
			</ul>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.interface-member">
			<h3>10.2.3. interface-member</h3>
			
			<p>This family node type includes these types:</p>
			
			<ul class="family-members">
				<li><a href="#node.breeder">breeder</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.callee">callee</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.property">property</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.method">method</a> </li>
			</ul>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="tree-node-layout-key">
		<h2>10.3. Tree node layout key</h2>
		
		<p>This section describes how the layout of a node type is represented in this specification.</p>
		
		<p>The layout for a node type is represented in this specification as a list of items. Each item represents a child node, or multiple child nodes with the same meaning.</p>
		
		<p>Each item in these lists first specifies how many child nodes with that meaning may appear, or it says nothing about the number, which means there must be one (and no more). The ways of representing these amounts is described below.</p>
		
		<dl>
			
				<dt>?</dt>
				<dd>0 or 1</dd>
			
			
				<dt>*</dt>
				<dd>0 or more</dd>
			
			
				<dt>+</dt>
				<dd>1 or more</dd>
			
		</dl>
		
		<p>Next comes the name of a node type, or &quot;expression&quot;. The child node represented by that list item must be of that type. The string &quot;expression&quot; means the node must be an expression.</p>
		
		<p>Lastly comes a optional label for refering to the child nodes represented by that item, when the type alone isn't enough to disambiguate which item is being referred to. These labels carry no semantic information, and are merely used by this specification to refer to specific child nodes. (Note this label is always singular, even for collections.)</p>
		
		<p>Example layout:</p>
		
		<pre>alpha
? beta gamma
? beta delta
* epsilon
+ expression zeta</pre>
		
		<p>The first item represents a single required child node of type &quot;alpha&quot;. The second item represents an optional child node of type &quot;beta&quot;, which can be referred to using the label &quot;gamma&quot;. The third item represents an optional child node of type &quot;beta&quot;, which can be referred to using the label &quot;delta&quot;. The fourth item refers to a collection of child nodes of type &quot;epsilon&quot;; the collection can be empty. The fifth item refers to a collection of expression child nodes; the collection must contain at least one node; nodes in this collection can be refered to using the label &quot;zeta&quot;.</p>
	</div>
	
	<div id="non-executable">
		<h2>10.4. Non-executable</h2>
		
		<p>Nodes that cannot be executed. Most serve only to group other nodes together.</p>
		
		<div id="node.argument">
			<h3>10.4.1. argument</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>? <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> parameter name</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
			</ul>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">func doSomething(Int a = 1, Int b = 2, Int c = 3, Int d) {...}
doSomething(7, default, default, 8)
doSomething(7, c = default, 8)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.boolean">
			<h3>10.4.2. boolean</h3>
			
			<p>Base node. Must specify either true or false.</p>
			
			<p>Cannot be evaluated because that would conflict with the &quot;true&quot; and &quot;false&quot; members of the Bool enum. Boolean values in the node tree use a boolean node, and boolean values in code use the &quot;true&quot; and &quot;false&quot; identikeys.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.direction">
			<h3>10.4.3. direction</h3>
			
			<p>Specifies the direction of a function parameter, one of: in, in-mutable, out, in-out, in-mutable-out</p>
			
			<p>A value passed to a function as an &quot;in&quot; parameter will not be mutated by the function. This means if the function uses the value in ways that may mutate the value, the value will be copied. If an action in the function may mutate the value, and the value does not declare a copy converter, an error results.</p>
			
			<p>Instances where the value may be mutated include when the interface of the value does not provide opacity information and the function calls a method, or if the interface does provide opacity information but the function calls a mutator method, or if the value is passed to another function as an in-mutable or in-mutable-out parameter.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">func alpha(in Int num) {
println num
}

func beta(in-mutable Int num) {
num += 567
}

func gamma(out Int num) {
//num not currently assigned to anything
num = 987
}

func delta(in-out Int num) {
println num
num = 1001
}

func epsilon(in-mutable-out Int num) {
num += 55555
num = 19591
}

Int num = 123
alpha(num)
beta(num) //value mutated
gamma(num) //num assigned to different value
delta(num) //num assigned to different value
epsilon(num) //value mutated and num assigned to different value</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.expose">
			<h3>10.4.4. expose</h3>
			
			<p>Imports all the child identikeys of the specified namespace into the enclosing scope.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>+ <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl std::Array&lt;std::Int&gt; numbers = generateNumbers()

expose std
decl Array&lt;Int&gt; numbers = generateNumbers()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.generic-parameter">
			<h3>10.4.5. generic-parameter</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> default interface</li>
			</ul>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.identikey-category">
			<h3>10.4.6. identikey-category</h3>
			
			<p>specifies one of: namespace, variable, constant, function</p>
			
			<p>See the <a href="#identikeys">section on identikeys</a>.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.identikey-type">
			<h3>10.4.7. identikey-type</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identikey-category">identikey-category</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
			</ul>

			<p class="process">[identikey-category] must not be namespace. [nullable-type] must not specify an interface if [identikey-category] is dynamic. [nullable-type] must specify nullable as false if [identikey-category] is function. (Note: The <a href="#node.declare-first">declare-first</a> node has additional restrictions.)</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl Int a = 3
declfirst func b = func()Int { 3 }</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.import">
			<h3>10.4.8. import</h3>
			
			<p>Binds a library to a namespace identikey.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> alias</li>
				<li>+ <a href="#node.import-attempt">import-attempt</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Each import-attempt node attempts to refer to a library. The agent should try each import-attempt node in order until it is able to find one with a scheme that it recognizes and leads to a library the agent is able to load. If the agent is not able to load a library after trying all import-attempt nodes, it must output an error message and end execution immediately.</p>
			
			<div id="node.import-attempt">
				<h4>10.4.8.1. import-attempt</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.string">string</a> scheme</li>
					<li><a href="#node.string">string</a> body</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
				
			<code xml:space="preserve">import Xml
	&quot;name&quot; : &quot;XmlLib&quot;
	&quot;UUID&quot; : &quot;9d0d5fdc-5a23-4375-892a-8cbfd80f0927&quot;
	&quot;local absolute path&quot; : &quot;/usr/bin/xmllib/niviok/xmllib.niviok.so&quot;
	&quot;local absolute path&quot; : &quot;C:\Program Files\XmlLib\bin\Niviok\xmllib.niviok.so&quot;
	&quot;local relative path&quot; : &quot;bin/xmllib.niviok.so&quot;
	&quot;URL&quot; : &quot;https://www.xmllib.org/repository/xmllib.niviok.so&quot;

def doc = Xml:Document()
doc.appendChild(doc.createElement(&quot;foo&quot;))
def Xml:Element root = doc.documentElement</code>
			
			<p>Note that this specification does not define any schemes. Which schemes are supported by an agent is agent-specific.</p>
			
			<p class="xxx">Need versioning information. Could just include versioning information in the body of each import-attempt, but then the version information would have to be repeated for every import-attempt. Even if going with that, example should be updated to inclue versioning information. But what if different schemes wanted to denote versioning information in different ways? For example, shared libraries on Unix have their own versioning system, with version numbers different from the public version number associated with a piece of software.</p>
		</div>

		<div id="node.worker">
			<h3>10.4.9. worker</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> face</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.worker">worker</a> child</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.member-implementation">member-implementation</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Note: May actually correspond to multiple workers, since some of the member-implementation nodes may implement members of inherited interfaces.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.member-implementation">
			<h3>10.4.10. member-implementation</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.member-identification">member-identification</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> function</li>
			</ul>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.member-identification">
			<h3>10.4.11. member-identification</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.member-type">member-type</a> </li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
			</ul>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.member-type">
			<h3>10.4.12. member-type</h3>
			
			<p>Specifies one of: breeder, callee, property setter, property getter, method.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.nullable-type">
			<h3>10.4.13. nullable-type</h3>

			<p>Specifies a value type, including whether the absence of a value is allowed.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
				<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> nullable</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>If [interface] produces null, an error results.</p>
		</div>

		<div id="node.parameter-info">
			<h3>10.4.14. parameter-info</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.direction">direction</a> </li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> has default value</li>
			</ul>
		</div>

		<div id="node.parameter-impl">
			<h3>10.4.15. parameter-impl</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.direction">direction</a> </li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> default value</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>When a [default value] is given, [default value] is executed for every call to the function. It is not executed when the function node is executed.</p>
		</div>
				
		<div id="node.plane">
			<h3>10.4.16. plane</h3>
			
			<p>A group of declarations within a bundle.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>* <a href="#node.scope-alteration">scope-alteration</a> alt</li>
				<li>+ <a href="#node.declare-first">declare-first</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>This node has scope, but only private identifiers are bound to it. Public and exported identifiers are bound to the scope of the bundle node.</p>
			
			<p>Planes aren't expressions because their declare-first nodes might rely on declare-first nodes in other planes, so all the declare-first nodes in a single plane can't just be executed all together.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.using">
			<h3>10.4.17. using</h3>
			
			<p>Creates an identikey that is associated with the same value/namespace as the specified identikey in the specified namespace.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>+ <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> target</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
			</ul>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">using Xml.XmlElement
using Xml.XmlDocument as Doc

import &quot;.NET: System&quot; as System
using System.Collections.Generic as box
box.IList&lt;Foo&gt; = new box.List&lt;Foo&gt;();</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">using FooBarBaz as FBZ
using System.out.print as puts
puts( (FBZ to String)(Gamma) )</code>
			
			<p>Each of the [target] identifiers, except for the last, must refer to a namespace. (The last can also refer to a namespace.)</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="non-producing-expressions">
		<h2>10.5. Non-producing expressions</h2>
		
		<p>Nodes that can be executed, but never produce.</p>

		<div id="loops">
			<h3>10.5.1. Loops</h3>

			<div id="node.conditional-loop">
				<h4>10.5.1.1. conditional-loop</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> test</li>
					<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> body</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p>Has scope.</p>
				
				<code xml:space="preserve">@while[ container.hasMore? ; println(container.next) ]

@while[ printNext() ]

@until[ stack.empty? ; println(stack.pop()) ]

@compound[
	@declare Int i = 0 ;
	@while[ i.lessThan?(container.length) ;
		println(container[i]) ;
		i++ ]]

@compound[
	@declare Iterator&lt;Int&gt; iterator = container.getIterator() ;
	@while[ iterator.hasMore? ;
		println(iterator.current) ;
		iterator.moveNext() ]]</code>
				
				<code xml:space="preserve">while container.hasMore?
	print container.next

while printNext() ;

until stack.empty?
	println stack.pop()

compound
	decl Int i = 0
	while i lt container.length
		println(container[i])
		i++

compound
	decl Iterator&lt;Int&gt; iterator = container.getIterator()
	while iterator.hasMore?
		println(iterator.current)
		iterator.moveNext()</code>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.enumerator-loop">
				<h4>10.5.1.2. enumerator-loop</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> container</li>
					<li>* <a href="#node.receiver">receiver</a> </li>
					<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> test</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> body</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p>Has scope.</p>
				
				<ol class="exec">
					<li>Execute [container] and let container be the result. Throw an error if container is not a Collection or Generator.</li>
					<li>Call enumerate on container with no arguments and let enumerator be the result.</li>
					<li>Create an identikey for each for-receiver.</li>
					<li>Call next on enumerator and assign the result to the identikeys. If an exception is thrown with an active interface of EnumeratorExhausted, swallow it and end execution. If anything else is thrown, follow normal exception rules.</li>
					<li>Execute [test]. If the result is not a Bool, throw an error. If the result is false, end execution.</li>
					<li>Execute [body].</li>
					<li>Go to step 4.</li>
				</ol>
				
				<code xml:space="preserve">@for[ x @in keys(foo) ; doStuff(x) ]

@for[ Int x @in keys&lt;Int&gt;(foo) ; doStuff(x) ]

@for[ Int x, Int y @in coords ; drawPoint(x, y) ]</code>
				
				<code xml:space="preserve">for x in keys(foo)
	doStuff(x)

for Int x in keys&lt;Int&gt;(foo)
	doStuff(x)

for x, y in coords
	drawPoint(x, y)

for Int x, Int y in coords
	drawPoint(x, y)

for range(0, 100)
	println &quot;test&quot;

for x in range(0, 100)
	println x

for x in range(0, 100, @inclusive=true)
	println x

for range(0, string.length) while not container.full
	container.push( string.unshift!() )

for x in range(0, 100) while not foo.done?
	foo.runTest(x)

for name in names
	println name

for String name in names
	println name</code>
				
				<div id="node.receiver">
					<h5>10.5.1.2.1. receiver</h5>
					
					<ul class="layout">
						<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
						<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
					</ul>
				</div>
			</div>

			<div id="node.unconditional-loop">
				<h4>10.5.1.3. unconditional-loop</h4>
				
				<p>Executes [action] continuously. Can only be exited by expressions in [action] such as break and return.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> body</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p>Has scope.</p>
			
				<code xml:space="preserve">repeat
	Event event = getNextEvent()
	select event.type
	case Event.QUIT
		break
	else
		defaultHandler(event)

repeat
	doSomething()
	unless someTest() : break</code>
			</div>
		</div>
		
		<div id="control-flow-alteration">
			<h3>10.5.2. Control flow alteration</h3>
			
			<p>The nodes alter the control flow when executed. For example, if present in a sequence of statements that are executed in order, executing a node of this type alters control flow in such a way that the following statements in the sequence are not executed (or execution is delayed until other expression nodes have been executed).</p>
		
			<div id="node.break">
				<h4>10.5.2.1. break</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li>? <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> label</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.continue">
				<h4>10.5.2.2. continue</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li>? <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> label</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.return">
				<h4>10.5.2.3. return</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p>Function call ends and evaluates to expression.</p>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.throw">
				<h4>10.5.2.4. throw</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p>If the expression isn't an Exception, throw a NonExceptionThrownError with the value from [value] as the wrapped value.</p>
			</div>
	
			<div id="node.yield">
				<h4>10.5.2.5. yield</h4>
				
				<p>Within a generator, specifies the next value for the generator to yield.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p class="process">Must be a descendant of a generator node, and not inside a function or class node. (XXX spec out the kind of barriers function and class nodes create)</p>
			</div>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.declare-empty">
			<h3>10.5.3. declare-empty</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li><a href="#node.identikey-type">identikey-type</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="process">The identikey-category of the identikey-type must specify &quot;variable&quot;. The nullable-type of the identikey-type must not specifiy nullable as false.</p>
			
			<p>Creates an identikey in the parent scope with the specified type. After this node executes, the produced identikey does not yet point to any values.</p>

			<code xml:space="preserve">decl foo
decl ? foo
decl Int foo
decl Int ? foo</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl bar
bar = 123
println(bar)
bar = 456
println(bar)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.null">
			<h3>10.5.4. null</h3>
			
			<p>Produces an untyped null.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>(XXX move) An untyped null can be cast to any interface, implicitly or explicitly, to form a typed null. A typed null can be downcast.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl Int ? foo = 123
foo = null //untyped null implicitly cast to an Int null
foo //evaluates to an Int null

decl String ? bar = (foo as void)</code>
			
			<p class="xxx">Why not just have a global reserved identikey named &quot;null&quot; of type void? It would always evaluate to an untyped null.</p>
		</div>
	</div>

	<div id="sometimes-producing-expressions">
		<h2>10.6. Sometimes producing expressions</h2>
		
		<p>Nodes that can be executed, and sometimes produce.</p>

		<div id="node.assign">
			<h3>10.6.1. assign</h3>
			
			<p>Assigns a value to an identikey.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> breed</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="process">The identikey's type must be dynamic, automatic, or strict. If the identikey's type is automatic or strict, the identifier must be variable (not constant).</p>
			
			<p>If bree is false:</p>
			
			<ol>
				<li>Let key by the identikey that [name] refers to.</li>
				<li>Execute [value] and let value be the product.</li>
				<li>Associate key with value so that key now refers (only) to value.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>If breed is true:</p>
			
			<ol>
				<li>Let key be the identikey that [name] refers to.</li>
				<li>Execute [value] and let parentValue be the product.</li>
				<li>Let faceValue be the required interface for key. If key does not require a particular interface, let faceValue be the active interface of parentValue.</li>
				<li>Find parentValue's breeder that produces values with an active interface of faceValue. If such a breeder is not found, throw an error.</li>
				<li>Activate the found breeder and let value be the product.</li>
				<li>Associate key with value so that key now refers (only) to value.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>Example of difference between breeding and not breeding:</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl Person person1
decl Person person2

person1 = Person()
person1.name = &quot;John&quot;
person2 = person1 //not breeding - person1 and person2 refer to same object
person2.name = &quot;Suzy&quot;
println( person1.name ) //Suzy

person1 = Person()
person1.name = &quot;Michael&quot;
person2 := person1 //breeding - person1 and person2 refer to different objects
person2.name = &quot;Kim&quot;
println( person1.name ) //Michael</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.call">
			<h3>10.6.2. call</h3>

			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> receiver</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.argument">argument</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Execute [receiver], and let receiver be the result.</li>
				<li>If result is not callable, throw an error.</li>
				<li>Execute the argument values in order.</li>
				<li>Send argument values to receiver for execution.</li>
				<li>Produce the result on the previous step.</li>
			</ol>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.cast">
			<h3>10.6.3. cast</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> source</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="process">If [nullable-type] is given, it must declare an interface.</p>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Execute [source] and let source be the result.</li>
				<li>If [nullable-type] is not given:
					<ol>
						<li>If source is not null, throw an error, because a non-null value cannot be cast to void.</li>
						<li>Otherwise, produce an untype null.</li>
					</ol>
				</li>
				<li>If [nullable] of [nullable-type] is true, and source is null, throw an error, because a null cannot be cast to a non-null type.</li>
				<li>Execute the [interface] of [nullable-type] and let face be the result.</li>
				<li>If source is non-null, cast it to face and return the result. If it cannot be cast to face, throw an error.</li>
				<li>If source is a typed null, and the associated interface does not inherit from face, throw an error.</li>
				<li>Produce a typed null with face as the associated face.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>If [source] is not null, evaluates to a value, with an active interface specified by nullable-type, that is associated with the same object as [source]. Can also be used to cast null to typed or untyped null.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">//value
123 as Int
123 as Int ?
123 as void //error

//typed null
(null as Int ?) as Int //error
(null as Int ?) as Int ?
(null as Int ?) as void

//untyped null
null as Int //error
null as Int ?
null as void

Int o = getIntAndString()
print (o as String).length

decl Int ? a = (null as Int)
decl String ? b = ((a as null) as String)

decl Int ? a = null
decl String ? b = a as null</code>
			
			<p>(XXX label or move) Rationale for casting to null: A generic type may want to cast an object to a parameter type, and the parameter type may be null. XXX But does that mean nullable-type must be replaced with a NullableType interface?</p> 
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.compound">
			<h3>10.6.4. compound</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>* <a href="#node.scope-alteration">scope-alteration</a> alt</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> member</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Has scope.</p>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Execute each expression in order. Produce the result of the last expression. (Produce nothing if the instance contained no expressions or the last expression didn't produce.)</li>
			</ol>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">compound {
	using System:Console
	using System:Collections as Boxes
	export Boxes:Generic
	Boxes:List numbers = List&lt;MyFace&gt;()
	Console.WriteLine(numbers.Count.ToString())
}</code>
		</div>
			
		<div id="node.conditional">
			<h3>10.6.5. conditional</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> test</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> result</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> else</li>
			</ul>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Execute [test] and let test1 be the result.</li>
				<li>Downcast test2 to Bool and let test2 be the result.</li>
				<li>If test2 is true, execute [result] and produce it's result, ending execution.</li>
				<li>If [else] is not present, produce null, ending execution.</li>
				<li>Execute [else] and produce it's result.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl Int a = (x ? 0 : 1)

if foo == 1
	doStuff1()
elif foo == 2
	doStuff2()
else
	doDefault()

decl bar =
	(foo == 1) ? getOne() :
	(foo == 2) ? getTwo() :
	getDefault()

decl bar =
	if foo == 1 : getOne()
	elif foo == 2 : getTwo()
	else : getDefault()

if not foo.isSetup?
	foo.setup()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.curry">
			<h3>10.6.6. curry</h3>
			
			<p>Provides a built-in means of partial application. (Note that Desal provides no built-in support for the original type of currying, where a multi-argument function is converted into a chain of single-argument functions.)</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> function</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.argument">argument</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> call</li>
			</ul>

			<p>If [call] is true, and this node results in the function receiving enough arguments to be called, the function will be called.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">func foo(Int a, Rat b, String c, Bool d) Int {
	...
}

//partial application
func(String,Bool)Int foo2 = foo(1, 2.34)
print foo2(&quot;text&quot;, true)

//other type of currying
func(Int)(
	func(Rat)(
		func(String)(
			func(Bool)Int ))) foo3 = curry(foo)
print foo3(1)(2.34)(&quot;text&quot;)(true)

//The above two are equivalent to:
print foo(1, 2.34, &quot;text&quot;, true)</code>
			
			<p>Assuming the function is not called: If the arguments match only one of the callees/methods of [value], this node produces a value with a function interface as the active interface. If the arguments match more than one of the callees/methods on [value], this node produces a value with an active interface that is made by adding the function interfaces of the callees/methods together.</p>
			
			<p>After execution, the specified parameters have values, so they do not appear on the resultant function.</p>
			
			<p>Once the function has all its arguments supplied, it is called if [call] is true, and the result of that call is produced.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">func doStuff1(Int a, String b, Bool alpha) {...}
func doStuff1(Int a, Rat b, Bool alpha) {...}
func doStuff2 = doStuff1~(3, alpha=false)
doStuff2(&quot;test&quot;)
doStuff2(123.456)</code>
			
			<p>The middle line perhaps might also be represented this way:</p>
			<code xml:space="preserve">(declare-first
	(identifier.name &quot;doStuff2&quot;)
	(curry
		(identifier.value &quot;doStuff1&quot;)
		(argument
			(integer.value 3))
		(argument
			(identifier.name &quot;alpha&quot;)
			(identifier.value &quot;false&quot;))))</code>

			<code xml:space="preserve">interface Alpha
func bar(Int a, Rat b, String c)

Alpha alpha = AlphaClass()

alpha.bar(0, 0.0, &quot;0&quot;)

func()void bar1 = alpha.bar~()
bar(1, 2.3, &quot;4&quot;)

func()void bar2 = alpha.bar~(c=&quot;text&quot;)
bar2(7, 9.8)

func()void bar3 = alpha.bar~(-9, 0.001, &quot;stuff&quot;)
bar3()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.declare-assign">
			<h3>10.6.7. declare-assign</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li><a href="#node.identikey-type">identikey-type</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> breed</li>
				<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> infer interface</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="process">The identikey-category of the identikey-type node must specify &quot;variable&quot; or &quot;constant&quot;. If the category is &quot;constant&quot;, [infer interface] must be false. If [infer interface] is true, the interface of the [nullable-type] of the [identikey-type] is set to be the same as the active interface of [value].</p>
			
			<p>Creates an identikey in the parent scope with the specified type, then assigns the specified value to it.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl foo = 123
decl ? foo = 123
decl auto foo = 123
decl auto ? foo = 123
decl Int foo = 123
decl Int ? foo = 123</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.declare-first">
			<h3>10.6.8. declare-first</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
				<li><a href="#node.identikey-type">identikey-type</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> breed</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="process">The identikey-category of the identikey-type must specify &quot;constant&quot; or &quot;function&quot;. (Should breed be required to be false if the identikey-category is function?)</p>
			
			<p>Creates an identikey in the parent scope with the specified type, then assigns the specified value to it.</p>
			
			<p>When a compound contains declare-first nodes, the declare-first nodes are executed before the other expressions in the compound are executed. The value expressions of declare-first nodes may depend on the values of other declare-first nodes in the same compound. For example, two interfaces could reference each other.</p>
			
			<p>This node can create identikeys before execution reaches it. For more information, see <a href="#handling-declare-first">this section</a>.</p>
			
			<p class="exec">Produce the value bound to the identikey created by this node.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">declfirst Foo = interface {
	prop ro Bar bar
	prop ro Int number
}

declfirst Bar = interface {
	prop ro Foo foo
}

Foo foo = getFoo()
println( foo.bar.foo.bar.foo.bar.foo.number )</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.identifier">
			<h3>10.6.9. identifier</h3>
			
			<p>Base/terminal node.</p>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Let ident be the identifier specified by this node.</li>
				<li>Let scope be the current scope.</li>
				<li>If scope has an identikey that is associated with ident, let scope be the parent scope of scope. If scope has no parent scope, throw an error. Continue moving through parent scopes until an identikey associated with ident is found. Let key be this identikey.</li>
				<li>If key is a function identikey, find parent function identikeys with that name, but with different types, and merge all the functions together. (XXX elaborate)</li>
				<li>If key is bound to a value, produce the value that key is bound to. If key has been declared that it can be bound to values, but it is currently not bound to anything, return null.</li>
				<li>If key is bound to a namespace, throw an error.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( foo )</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(println foo)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.ignore">
			<h3>10.6.10. ignore</h3>
			
			<p>Instructs an agent to not output certain warnings.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> content</li>
				<li>+ <a href="#node.ignore-member">ignore-member</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<div id="node.ignore-member">
				<h4>10.6.10.1. ignore-member</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.string">string</a> name</li>
					<li><a href="#node.integer">integer</a> depth</li>
				</ul>
			
				<p>The [name] can be a warning name from the <a href="#warnings-list">specified warnings</a> or an agent-defined warning name. Unknown warning names should by default produce a warning that the warning name is unknown. Agents should provide an option to disable warnings for unknown warning names.</p>
				
				<p>The [depth] specifies what descendant nodes are affected by the ignore node. Counting begins at one with the [content] node of the ignore node and increments by one for each further descendant.</p>
				
				<code xml:space="preserve">(ignore
	(ignore-member
		(string.name &quot;always null&quot;)
		(integer.depth ...))
	(call.content
		(function.identifier println)
		(assignment.argument
			(identifier.name foo)
			(for-value.value
				...))))</code>
				
				<p>Here, if the [depth] was 1, a warning should be output by the agent for the assignment node that the [value] node will never produce a value when executed (a.k.a. always evaluate to null).</p>
			</div>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.labeled">
			<h3>10.6.11. labeled</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> label</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> child</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="process">The [child] node must be an iteration node, a compound node, a possibility node, a conditional node, or a select node. (XXX update and explain requirements instead of just listing nodes that meet requirements)</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">func setupCell(Int searchID) {
	decl Cell wantedCell
	
	outer: for row in table {
		for cell in row
			if cell.ID eql searchID
				wantedCell = cell
				break outer
	}
	
	if wantedCell != null
		doSomething(wantedCell)
}</code>
		</div>

		<div id="node.namespaced-value-identikey">
			<h3>10.6.12. namespaced-value-identikey</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>+ <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> namespace</li>
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> identikey name</li>
			</ul>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">namespace foo {
	namespace bar {
		decl Int alpha = 123
	}
}
decl Int alpha = foo:bar:alpha
println( alpha ) //123</code>
		</div>
	
		<div id="node.select">
			<h3>10.6.13. select</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.case">case</a> </li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> else</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="exec">Execute [value]. Execute each [values] child of each [case] and compare them to the [value] value (with the .equals? method of the [value] value) until finding a match. Then, execute the [result] of that case and produce the result. If no match is found, and [else] is given, execute [else] and produce its result.</p>
			
			<div id="node.case">
				<h4>10.6.13.1. case</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li>+ <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> result</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">select event.type
case Events.QUIT {
	return
}
case Events.FOO, Events.BAR, Events.MAZ {
	//no action
}
else {
	throw ErrorClass(&quot;unknown event type&quot;)
}

select foo
case 1
	doStuff1()
case 2
	doStuff2()
else
	doDefault()

decl bar = select foo
	case 1 : getOne()
	case 2 : getTwo()
	else getDefault()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.try-catch">
			<h3>10.6.14. try-catch</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> try</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.exception-handler">exception-handler</a> </li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> else</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> finally</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="xxx">The term &quot;else&quot; is not descriptive enough in this situation. Possible replacements: &quot;onsuccess&quot;, &quot;then&quot;</p>
			
			<p class="process">Must contain more than just [try].</p>
			
			<div id="node.exception-handler">
				<h4>10.6.14.1. exception-handler</h4>

				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> catch</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
					<li>? <a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> result</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">try
	decl foo = getSomething()
observe( OutOfMemoryError )
	println &quot;I'm not catching that!&quot;
	//exception is noticed by this try-catch node, but not caught
	//the exception continues to rise out
catch( NullError )
	println &quot;null error&quot;
catch( FooError e )
	println &quot;FooError: (e.message)&quot;
catch( Error )
	println &quot;unknown error&quot;
catch( Exception )
	println &quot;unknown exception&quot;
observe
	println &quot;how execution reach here? am not good with computer&quot;
else
	println &quot;no errors!&quot;
	doSomeStuff() //don't catch errors from this in this node
finally
	cleanup(foo)

decl Status stat =
try
	doSomething()
	Statuses.SUCCESS
catch( NotSoBadError ) {
	Statuses.ERROR
observe
	println &quot;something horrible not caught when trying to doSomething()&quot;</code>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="always-producing-expressions">
		<h2>10.7. Always producing expressions</h2>
		
		<p>Expressions that, aside from e.g. exceptions, always produce when executed. These nodes, other than the and, nand, or, and nor nodes, are not intended to have side effects.</p>
		
		<div id="boolean-logic">
			<h3>10.7.1. Boolean logic</h3>
			
			<div id="node.and">
				<h4>10.7.1.1. and</h4>
				
				<p>Evaluates to false if either child expression evaluates to false.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> first</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> second</li>
				</ul>
				
				<ol class="exec">
					<li>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [1] to Bool.</li>
					<li>If [2] is false, evaluate this node to false.</li>
					<li>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [4] to Bool.</li>
					<li>Evaluate this node to [5].</li>
				</ol>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.nand">
				<h4>10.7.1.2. nand</h4>
				
				<p>Evaluates to true if either child expression evaluates to false.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> first</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> second</li>
				</ul>
				
				<ol class="exec">
					<li>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [1] to Bool.</li>
					<li>If [2] is false, evaluate this node to true.</li>
					<li>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [4] to Bool.</li>
					<li>Evaluate this node to the inverse of [5].</li>
				</ol>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.or">
				<h4>10.7.1.3. or</h4>
				
				<p>Evaluates to true if either child expression evaluates to true.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> first</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> second</li>
				</ul>
				
				<ol class="exec">
					<li>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [1] to Bool.</li>
					<li>If [2] is true, evaluate this node to true.</li>
					<li>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [4] to Bool.</li>
					<li>Evaluate this node to [5].</li>
				</ol>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.nor">
				<h4>10.7.1.4. nor</h4>
				
				<p>Evaluates to false if either child expression evaluates to true.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> first</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> second</li>
				</ul>
				
				<ol class="exec">
					<li>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [1] to Bool.</li>
					<li>If [2] is true, evaluate this node to false.</li>
					<li>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [4] to Bool.</li>
					<li>Evaluate this node to the inverse of [5].</li>
				</ol>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.xor">
				<h4>10.7.1.5. xor</h4>
				
				<p>Evaluates to true if the child expressions evaluate to different values.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> first</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> second</li>
				</ul>
				
				<ol class="exec">
					<li>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [1] to Bool.</li>
					<li>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [3] to Bool.</li>
					<li>If [2] and [4] are different, evaluate to true. Otherwise, evaluate to false.</li>
				</ol>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.xnor">
				<h4>10.7.1.6. xnor</h4>
				
				<p>Evaluates to true if the child expressions evaluate to the same value.</p>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> first</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> second</li>
				</ul>
				
				<ol class="exec">
					<li>Evaluate the first [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [1] to Bool.</li>
					<li>Evaluate the second [expression] node.</li>
					<li>Downcast [3] to Bool.</li>
					<li>If [2] and [4] are the same, evaluate to true. Otherwise, evaluate to false.</li>
				</ol>
			</div>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">true and false
true xnor false</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(and true false)
(xnor true false)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.breed">
			<h3>10.7.2. breed</h3>
			
			<p>Creates a new object (&quot;offspring&quot;) that encodes some or all of the information from the parent, and exposes that information through the specified interface. If an interface is not specified, the new object has same type as the parent, and should encode most or all of the information from the parent. If an interface is specified, the new object may be an exact copy of the parent object, or it may be of a completetly different form that encodes very little information from the parent object.</p>
			
			<p>This node can be used to copy a value, or to convert a value into a different type.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> parent</li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
			</ul>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Execute [parent] and let parentValue be the product.</li>
				<li>Execute [interface] and let faceValue be the product. If [interface] is not given, let faceValue be the active interface of parentValue.</li>
				<li>Find parentValue's breeder that produces values with faceValue as the active interface. If such a breeder is not found, throw an error.</li>
				<li>Activate the found breeder.</li>
				<li>Produce the new value produced by the breeder.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl Int num1 = 987
decl Int num2 = copy(num)
decl Rat num3 = (num to Rat)</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(decl Int num1 987)
(decl Int num2 (copy num))
(decl Rat num3 (breed num Rat))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.bundle">
			<h3>10.7.3. bundle</h3>
			
			<p>A grouping of library references (import) and groups of declarations (plane).</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>* <a href="#node.import">import</a> </li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.scope-alteration">scope-alteration</a> alt</li>
				<li>+ <a href="#node.plane">plane</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>The bundle node type is the type of the root node. No node can contain a bundle node. All Desal nodes that are executed in any way must be part of a complete Desal tree, which means having a bundle node as the root node.</p>
			
			<p>Implementations must not pass any arguments to the main function when executing a bundle as a standalone executable. Implementations should instead provide program arguments through a library which can be imported with the import node. Note that the program arguments are not required by this specification to be a sequence of strings.</p>
			
			<p>The result produced by executing a bundle node as a standalone executable may be converted as necesary to suit the containing environment. How this conversion is performed depends on the containing environment and the Desal implementation, and is not covered by this specification.</p>
			
			<p>When treating a bundle as a standalone executable:</p>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Let globalScope be a new scope.</li>
				<li>Create the identikeys required by <a href="#reserved-identikey-names">Reserved identikey names</a>.</li>
				<li>For each <a href="#node.import">import</a>, <a href="#node.using">using</a>, and <a href="#node.expose">expose</a> child node, add the identikeys to globalScope specified by that node.</li>
				<li>Execute all declaration-first children of each plane together as required by <a href="#handling-declare-first">Handling declare-first nodes</a>.</li>
				<li>Let mainKey be the identikey in globalScope that is associated with identifier &quot;main&quot;. If such an identikey does not exist, throw an error.</li>
				<li>Let mainVal be the result of evaluating mainKey. If mainVal is null, throw an error.</li>
				<li>Call mainVal with no arguments and let rv be the result. If mainVal is not callable, throw an error. If mainVal does not have a callee that takes no arguments, throw an error.</li>
				<li>If rv is null, produce a value, with Int as the active interface, that encodes the number zero. Else if rv has an active interface that inherits from Int, downcast rv to Int and produce the result. Else if rv, with it's current active interface, can breed an Int, have rv breed an Int, and produce the result. Else throw an error.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>When treating a bundle as a library:</p>
			
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Let globalScope be a new scope.</li>
				<li>Create the identikeys required by <a href="#reserved-identikey-names">Reserved identikey names</a>.</li>
				<li>For each <a href="#node.import">import</a>, <a href="#node.using">using</a>, and <a href="#node.expose">expose</a> child node, add the identikeys to globalScope specified by that node.</li>
				<li>Execute all declaration-first children of each plane together as required by <a href="#handling-declare-first">Handling declare-first nodes</a>.</li>
				<li>Expose globalScope, in an immutable form, to the containing environment. How this is done depends on the containing enviornment and the Desal implementation, and is not covered by this specification.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p class="xxx">When acting as a standalone executable, need to specify what happens to exceptions that bubble all the way up to the bundle node. They are caught, an error message is output, and the bundle node returns some value, like 1. The bundle may expose to the containing environment additional information, depending on the enclosing environment and Desal implementation.</p>
			
			<p class="xxx">When acting as a standalone executable, what kind of errors should bundle by throwing? This is a problem that applies to many other nodes as well.</p>
			
			<p class="xxx">For when acting as a library, need a means of hiding/showing certain child namespaces/identikeys of the global namespace. For example, a bundle may have declarations in the global namespace and in a &quot;private&quot; namespace. The bundle should expose the declarations in the global namespace but hide the declarations in the private namespace. There has also been consideration of an &quot;export&quot; attribute/node that would expose specified identikeys, and all other identikeys would not be exposed.</p>
			
			<p class="xxx">The identikeys added to globalScope by import, using, and expose nodes should not be exposed to the containing environment when the bundle is acting as a library.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.caller">
			<h3>10.7.4. caller</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> method name</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Creates a function that, when passed the type specified by [interface], calls the method named [method name] on the first argument with the rest of the arguments sent to it. It's purpose is to help with functional programming.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">interface Foo {
	func doStuff(Int, Int) Rat
}

decl Foo foo = getFoo()
decl func(Foo,Int,Int)Rat doStuffer = Foo::doStuff
println doStuffer(foo,3,7)

decl doStuffer2 = dyn::doStuff
println doStuffer2(foo,3,7)

//below all equilavent:
println Foo::doStuff(foo,3,7)
println dyn::doStuff(foo,3,7)
println foo.doStuff(3,7)</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(decl Foo foo
	(getFoo))
(decl auto doStuffer
	(caller Foo doStuff))
(println (doStuffer foo 3 7))

(decl const doStuffer2
	(caller dyn doStuff))
(println (doStuffer2 foo 3 7))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.object">
			<h3>10.7.5. object</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>+ <a href="#node.worker">worker</a> </li>
			</ul>
		</div>
		
		 xxxxxx

		&lt;section xml:id=&quot;node.class&quot;&gt;
			&lt;title&gt;class&lt;/title&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;Evaluates to a value that, when called, produces other values. The interfaces supported by the produced values are implemented in the way specified by this class node. The active interface of the produced value is specified by this class.&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;The active interface of the value that is produced when a class node is executed inherits from the master interface of the class. The master interface is the sum of all the root interfaces implemented by the class.&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;para role=&quot;xxx&quot;&gt;XML comments with important information&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;simplelist role=&quot;layout&quot;&gt;
				&lt;!-- private and possibly public; can't be &quot;call&quot; or &quot;callee&quot; --&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;* static-member static declaration&lt;/member&gt;
				
				&lt;!-- private --&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;? expression static constructor&lt;/member&gt;
				
				&lt;!-- public --&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;* function static callee&lt;/member&gt;
				
				&lt;!-- public --&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;* class-property static property&lt;/member&gt;
				
				&lt;!-- private and public --&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;* function instance constructor&lt;/member&gt;
				
				&lt;!-- private --&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;* declaration instance declaration&lt;/member&gt;
				
				&lt;!-- private and public --&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;* worker&lt;/member&gt;
			&lt;/simplelist&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;XXX The static callees and static properties may not always be visible in the class node's scope. (An example of being visible is assigning the value produced by the class node to an identifier.) Should some identifier (e.g. &quot;thisClass&quot;) be introduced that evaluates to the class's value? (e.g. thisClass.property = foo) Or should a general means of accessing the enclosing expression node's value be introduced? (e.g. thisValue.property = foo)&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;The above is not a problem for interface implementations due to the &quot;this&quot; identikey being bound to the active instance.&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;The children of class nodes can be grouped by several means.&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;By count:&lt;/para&gt;
			&lt;table&gt;
				&lt;tbody&gt;
					&lt;tr&gt;
						&lt;th&gt;&lt;/th&gt;
						&lt;th&gt;public&lt;/th&gt;
						&lt;th&gt;private&lt;/th&gt;
					&lt;/tr&gt;
					&lt;tr&gt;
						&lt;th&gt;static - only 1&lt;/th&gt;
						&lt;td&gt;callees, getters/setters, methods, workers&lt;/td&gt;
						&lt;td&gt;static constructor, instance constructors, static declarations, instance methods&lt;/td&gt;
					&lt;/tr&gt;
					&lt;tr&gt;
						&lt;th&gt;instance - 1 per instance&lt;/th&gt;
						&lt;td&gt;&lt;/td&gt;
						&lt;td&gt;instance declarations&lt;/td&gt;
					&lt;/tr&gt;
				&lt;/tbody&gt;
			&lt;/table&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;By scopes: (in scope means something can be accessed through a single identifier as a free identikey)&lt;/para&gt;
			&lt;simplelist&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;static scope
					&lt;simplelist&gt;
						&lt;member&gt;public
							&lt;simplelist&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;defined by: static declarations (as properties and methods; must have access with get and/or set), static properties, instance constructors (as callees)&lt;/member&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;in scope: (none)&lt;/member&gt;
							&lt;/simplelist&gt;
						&lt;/member&gt;
						&lt;member&gt;private
							&lt;simplelist&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;defined by: static declarations, instance constructors (as functions bound to &quot;construct&quot;)&lt;/member&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;in scope: static constructor, callees, getters/setters, methods, expressions in static declarations&lt;/member&gt;
							&lt;/simplelist&gt;
						&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;/simplelist&gt;
				&lt;/member&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;instance scope
					&lt;simplelist&gt;
						&lt;member&gt;public
							&lt;simplelist&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;defined by: workers (or really, by the interface)&lt;/member&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;in scope: (none)&lt;/member&gt;
							&lt;/simplelist&gt;
						&lt;/member&gt;
						&lt;member&gt;private
							&lt;simplelist&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;defined by: instance declarations, instance methods&lt;/member&gt;
								&lt;member&gt;in scope: expressions in instance declarations, instance methods, interface implementations, instance constructors&lt;/member&gt;
							&lt;/simplelist&gt;
						&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;/simplelist&gt;
				&lt;/member&gt;
			&lt;/simplelist&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;Note: Instance scopes are children of the static scope.&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;para role=&quot;process&quot;&gt;Must have at least one worker. Including the worker nodes that are inherited by this class's child worker nodes, one and only one of the worker nodes must be specified as default.&lt;/para&gt;
			
			&lt;orderedlist role=&quot;exec&quot;&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Create scope, STATIC_SCOPE.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Create an interface, CLASS_INTERFACE.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Add instance constructors as free functions to STATIC_SCOPE.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Add instance constructors as callees to CLASS_INTERFACE.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Evaluate the declaration of every &lt;link linkend=&quot;node.static-member&quot;&gt;static-member&lt;/link&gt; that has a &lt;link linkend=&quot;node.declare-first&quot;&gt;declare-first&lt;/link&gt;, in the scope of STATIC_SCOPE. If the identikey-type of the &lt;link linkend=&quot;node.declare-first&quot;&gt;declare-first&lt;/link&gt; is function, and it has access of get, add a method to CLASS_INTERFACE with the same function interface and name. Otherwise, create a property with a getter if declared public.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Evaluate the declarations of the rest of the static-member nodes in the scope of STATIC_SCOPE, except for the static-member nodes with a declare-const-empty. Create properties as appropriate when the access nodes specify to do so.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;In the scope of STATIC_SCOPE, evaluate the static-member nodes that have declare-const-empty nodes. Create properties as appropriate when the access nodes specify to do so.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Add the static callees as free functions in STATIC_SCOPE.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Add the static callees and the static properties to CLASS_INTERFACE.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Execute the static constructor.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Seal the identikeys created by the declare-const-empty nodes, meaning don't allow their bound status to change.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Create a value with CLASS_INTERFACE as the active interface.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Evaluate this node to the above value.&lt;/listitem&gt;
			&lt;/orderedlist&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;When a constructor is called:&lt;/para&gt;
			&lt;orderedlist role=&quot;exec&quot;&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Create a scope, INSTANCE_SCOPE. Set STATIC_SCOPE as the parent scope.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Evaluate all declare-first nodes in scope of INSTANCE_SCOPE.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Execute the appropriate constructor.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Evaluate the function-call that lead to this constructor being evaluated to a value with INSTANCE_SCOPE as the object and the default interface implementation of the class as the active interface implementation.&lt;/listitem&gt;
				&lt;listitem&gt;Note: When the interface implementation is used, the value will pass the object into the interface implementation.&lt;/listitem&gt;
			&lt;/orderedlist&gt;
			
			&lt;section xml:id=&quot;node.static-member&quot;&gt;
				&lt;title&gt;static-member&lt;/title&gt;
				
				&lt;simplelist role=&quot;layout&quot;&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;declaration decl&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;? access&lt;/member&gt;
				&lt;/simplelist&gt;
				
				&lt;para role=&quot;process&quot;&gt;If the declaration declares a const identifier, and access is present, the access node must be declared get.&lt;/para&gt;
				
				&lt;para role=&quot;xxx&quot;&gt;poorly named&lt;/para&gt;
			&lt;/section&gt;
			
			&lt;section xml:id=&quot;node.declaration&quot;&gt;
				&lt;title&gt;declaration&lt;/title&gt;
				
				&lt;para&gt;declaration is a family of node types, like expression. The node types included in this family are:&lt;/para&gt;
				
				&lt;simplelist role=&quot;family-members&quot;&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;declare-empty&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;declare-assign&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;declare-first&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;declare-const-empty&lt;/member&gt;
				&lt;/simplelist&gt;
			&lt;/section&gt;
			
			&lt;section xml:id=&quot;node.declare-const-empty&quot;&gt;
				&lt;title&gt;declare-const-empty&lt;/title&gt;
				
				&lt;simplelist role=&quot;layout&quot;&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;identifier name&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;identikey-type&lt;/member&gt;
				&lt;/simplelist&gt;
				
				&lt;para&gt;Identifiers created by this node are always const. [identikey-type] must be value or function. The class's static constructor is allowed to assign values to static identifiers created by this node. If anthing tries to assign a value to an identikey create by this node, and the identikey is already bound to something, throw an error. The class's instance constructors are allowed to assign values to instance identifiers created by this node. An error results if identikeys produced by declare-const-empty nodes are dereferenced before being bound to anything.&lt;/para&gt;
			&lt;/section&gt;
			
			&lt;section xml:id=&quot;node.named-function&quot;&gt;
				&lt;title&gt;named-function&lt;/title&gt;
				
				&lt;simplelist role=&quot;layout&quot;&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;identifier name&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;function function&lt;/member&gt;
				&lt;/simplelist&gt;
			&lt;/section&gt;
			
			&lt;section xml:id=&quot;node.class-property&quot;&gt;
				&lt;title&gt;class-property&lt;/title&gt;
				
				&lt;simplelist role=&quot;layout&quot;&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;identifier&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;identikey-type&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;? function getter&lt;/member&gt;
					&lt;member&gt;? function setter&lt;/member&gt;
				&lt;/simplelist&gt;
				
				&lt;para role=&quot;process&quot;&gt;Must have a getter and/or setter. If only identifier and identikey-type are given, an error results.&lt;/para&gt;
			&lt;/section&gt;
			
			&lt;programlisting&gt;
class Foo {
	...
	construct() {...}
	impl Bar {...}
}

interface of Foo {
	inherit Bar
	call() Bar
}

(Foo as Interface) == Bar //true
			&lt;/programlisting&gt;
			
			&lt;programlisting&gt;
class Foo {
	...
	construct() {...}
	impl Bar default {...}
	impl define Bar2 {...} //the identifier &quot;Bar2&quot; is required
}

interface of Foo {
	inherit Bar + {{interface Bar2}}
	call() Bar
	get Interface Bar2
}

(Foo as Interface) == (Bar + Foo.Bar2) //true
			&lt;/programlisting&gt;
		&lt;/section&gt;
		
		
		
		<div id="node.dictionary">
			<h3>10.7.6. dictionary</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> key type</li>
				<li><a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> value type</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.dictionary-entry">dictionary-entry</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<div id="node.dictionary-entry">
				<h4>10.7.6.1. dictionary-entry</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> key</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl ages = dict (String, Int) {
	&quot;Saray&quot; : 12,
	&quot;John&quot; : 70,
	&quot;Mike&quot; : 23
}

for pair name, age in ages
	println name &quot; &quot; age</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(decl const ages
	(dict String Int
		((&quot;Saray&quot; 12) (&quot;John&quot; 70) (&quot;Mike&quot; 23))))

(forpair name age ages
	(println name &quot; &quot; age))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.enum">
			<h3>10.7.7. enum</h3>
			
			<p>An enum is similar to an immutable dict.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
				<li>+ <a href="#node.enum-entry">enum-entry</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p class="process">If [type] is not given, no enum entries can have a value. If [type] is given, all enum entries must have a value. Note that every enum entry has have a unique value. (XXX include restriction in execution instructions)</p>
			
			<div id="node.enum-entry">
				<h4>10.7.7.1. enum-entry</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
					<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			
			<p>If [type] is given:</p>
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Let EntryFace be a new interface that inherits from EnumDictEntry&lt;T&gt; where T is specified by [type].</li>
				<li>For every [enum-entry], create a value with EntryFace as the active interface, where the &quot;value&quot; and &quot;name&quot; properties are those specified by the [enum-entry].</li>
				<li>Let ListFace be a new interface. For every [enum-entry], add a readonly property to ListFace with the type of EntryFace and a name specified by the [enum-entry].</li>
				<li>Let EnumFace be a new interface that inherits from Interface, EnumDict&lt;T, U&gt;, and ListFace, where T is EntryFace and U is specified by [type].</li>
				<li>Let EnumInstance be a value with EnumFace as the active interface such that:
					<ul>
						<li>the value given from getting a property of ListFace is the value created in step 2 that is associated with the same [enum-entry] as the property</li>
						<li>the Interface implementation is EntryFace, i.e. EnumInstance cast to Interface is EnumFace</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>Produce EnumInstance.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>If [type] is not given:</p>
			<ol class="exec">
				<li>Let EntryFace be a new interface that inherits from EnumEntry.</li>
				<li>For every [enum-entry], create a value with EntryFace as the active interface, where the &quot;name&quot; property is that specified by the [enum-entry].</li>
				<li>Let ListFace be a new interface. For every [enum-entry], add a readonly property to ListFace with the type of EntryFace and a name specified by the [enum-entry].</li>
				<li>Let EnumFace be a new interface that inherits from Interface, Enum&lt;T&gt;, and ListFace, where T is EntryFace.</li>
				<li>Let EnumInstance be a value with EnumFace as the active interface such that:
					<ul>
						<li>the value given from getting a property of ListFace is the value created in step 2 that is associated with the same [enum-entry] as the property</li>
						<li>the Interface implementation is EntryFace, i.e. EnumInstance cast to Interface is EnumFace</li>
					</ul>
				</li>
				<li>Produce EnumInstance.</li>
			</ol>
			
			<p>Note that the sections specifying Enum, EnumDict, EnumEntry, and EnumDictEntry have additional requirements on the behavior of instances of these interfaces.</p>
			
			<pre>enum Animal {
	dog, cat, fish, parrot, ferret, gerbil, hamster
}

interface EntryFace
	inherit EnumEntry

interface ListFace
	get EntryFace dog
	get EntryFace cat
	get EntryFace fish
	get EntryFace parrot
	get EntryFace ferret
	get EntryFace gerbil
	get EntryFace hamster

interface EnumFace
	inherit Interface
	inherit Enum&lt;EntryFace&gt;
	inherit EnumList

Animal a = Animal.dog
Animal b = Animal.fromName(&quot;cat&quot;)
println Animal.size //assuming size is specified by Collection&lt;T&gt;

for animal in Animal
	println animal.name

activeInterface(Animal) == Interface + Enum&lt;EntryFace&gt; + EnumList
(Animal as Interface) == EntryFace</pre>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(enum Animal
	(dog cat fish parrot ferret gerbil hamster)

(for animal Animal
	(println animal.name))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.extract-member">
			<h3>10.7.8. extract-member</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> source</li>
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> member name</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Retrieves the a method or the value of a property from the value specified by [source]. If the active interface of the value specified by [source] does not have a property or method with the specified name, throw an exception.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( alpha.beta )
alpha.doStuff()</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(println alpha.beta)
(alpha.doStuff)</code>
		</div>

		<div id="node.function">
			<h3>10.7.9. function</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>* <a href="#node.parameter-impl">parameter-impl</a> </li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> return info</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> body</li>
			</ul>

			<p class="xxx">Specify barrier, which is like the kind of barrier that is in class nodes. Compare this kind of barrier to scope barriers -- nodes that &quot;have scope&quot;. The [body] node is not executed when this node is executed, but it may be executed after this node has executed.</p>
			
			<p>If [return info] is not present, the function does not return anything. I.e., it does not produced a value when call.</p>
			
			<p>When this node is executed, it produces a value with a function interface as the active interface. Only the [parameter] node and [return info]'s [interface] nodes are executed at this time. When the resultant value is called, the [body] node is executed in the scope of this function node.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl square = func(a) {
	a * a
}

println( square(2) )</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(decl const square
	(function (a) void
		(* a a)))

(println (square 2))</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl square = {a|a*a}
println( square(2) )</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( {a|a*a} 2 )</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.function-interface">
			<h3>10.7.10. function-interface</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> template-argument-count</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.parameter-info">parameter-info</a> </li>
				<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> return info</li>
			</ul>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( func(Int,Int)Rat )</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(println (funcface (Int Int) Rat))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.generator">
			<h3>10.7.11. generator</h3>

			<p>Produces a value that implements an instantiation of the Generator generic interface.</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> body</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Has scope.</p>
			
			<p>If [type] is not given, the generator does not produce. (The generator could still be useful for producing side effects.)</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl foo = generator {
	decl Int i = 2
	while i lt 5 {
		yield i
		i++
	}
}

for i in foo {
	print i &quot; &quot;
}

prints: '2 3 4 '

interface of foo == Generator&lt;Int&gt;</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(decl const foo
	(generator
		(decl Int i 2)
		(while (lt i 5)
			(compound
				(yield i)
				(++ i)))))

(forin i foo
	(print i &quot; &quot;))</code>

			<code xml:space="preserve">decl foo = func(Int a, Int b) Generator&lt;Int&gt; {
	return generator {
		decl Int i = a
		while i lt b {
			yield i
			i++
		}
	}
}

for i in foo(2, 5) {
	print i &quot; &quot;
}

prints: '2 3 4 '</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl foo = genfunc(Int a, Int b) Int {
	decl Int i = a
	while i &lt; b {
		yield i
		i++
	}
}

for i in foo(2, 5) {
	print i &quot; &quot;
}

prints: '2 3 4 '</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl foo = [2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3]
decl foo = [x in L if x^2 &gt; 3]
decl foo = [x in L]
for o in [2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3] {
	println o
}

//convert to Array
Array&lt;Int&gt;([2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3])

//insert into existing collection
collection.insert([2*x for x in L if x^2 &gt; 3])</code>
		</div>
		
		 xxx
				  
		&lt;section xml:id=&quot;node.generic-class&quot;&gt;
			&lt;title&gt;generic-class&lt;/title&gt;
			
			&lt;simplelist role=&quot;layout&quot;&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;+ generic-parameter parameter&lt;/member&gt;
				&lt;member&gt;class&lt;/member&gt;
			&lt;/simplelist&gt;
			
			&lt;para&gt;Evaluates to a value with an active interface that inherits from GenericClass and one or more function interfaces. When called, the value returns the value returned from evaluating the class node.&lt;/para&gt;
		&lt;/section&gt;
		
		
		
		<div id="node.generic-function">
			<h3>10.7.12. generic-function</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>+ <a href="#node.generic-parameter">generic-parameter</a> parameter</li>
				<li><a href="#node.function">function</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Evaluates to a value with an active interface that inherits from GenericClass and one or more function interfaces. When called, the value returns the value returned from evaluating the function node.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">func larger&lt;T&gt;(T a, T b) T {
	if a lt b
		return b
	return a
}

println larger(2, 7) //prints &quot;7&quot;</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(declfirst auto larger
	(genericfunction (T) ((T a) (T b)) T
		(if (lt a b)
			(return b))
		(return a)))

(println (larger 2 7))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.generic-interface">
			<h3>10.7.13. generic-interface</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>+ <a href="#node.generic-parameter">generic-parameter</a> parameter</li>
				<li><a href="#node.interface">interface</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Evaluates to a value with an active interface that inherits from GenericClass and one or more function interfaces. When called, the value returns the value returned from evaluating the interface node.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">interface List&lt;T&gt; {
	func addFront(T)
	func addBack(T)
	func removeFront() T
	func removeBack() T
}

decl List&lt;Int&gt; list = getNumbers()
list.addFront(2)
list.addBack(3)
list.addFront(1)
println list.removeFront() //prints &quot;1&quot;
println list.removeBack() //prints &quot;3&quot;</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(declfirst auto List
	(genericinterface (T)
		(func addFront (T) void)
		(func addBack (T) void)
		(func removeFront () T)
		(func removeBack () T)))

(decl List&lt;Int&gt; list
	(getNumbers))
(list.addFront 2)
(list.addBack 3)
(list.addFront 1)
(println (list.removeFront))
(println (list.removeBack))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.instantiate-generic">
			<h3>10.7.14. instantiate-generic</h3>
			
			<p class="xxx">Need to decide how to include type information. Type value, or type node? Write down and compare pros and cons. (Some related info in &quot;type occurrence.txt&quot;)</p>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> generic</li>
				<li>+ <a href="#node.argument">argument</a> </li>
			</ul>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">decl List&lt;Int&gt; numbers</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(decl List&lt;Int&gt; numbers)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.integer">
			<h3>10.7.15. integer</h3>
			
			<p>Base node. Evaluates to an object reference with BigInt as the active interface. The object may implement other interfaces if they do not conflict with the BigInt interface. Must not implement the LimInt interface.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( 789 )</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(println 789)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.interface">
			<h3>10.7.16. interface</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li>* <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> inheritee</li>
				<li>* <a href="#node.interface-member">interface-member</a> member</li>
			</ul>
			
			
			
			<div id="node.breeder">
				<h4>10.7.16.1. breeder</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li>? <a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p>Specifies that implementations of that interface can be converted into the specified type. Or, if [interface] isn't given, that the value can be copied.</p>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.callee">
				<h4>10.7.16.2. callee</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li>* <a href="#node.parameter-info">parameter-info</a> </li>
					<li>? <a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> return info</li>
				</ul>
				
				<p>If [return info] is not present, the callee does not produce anything when called.</p>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.property">
				<h4>10.7.16.3. property</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
					<li><a href="#node.boolean">boolean</a> writable</li>
					<li><a href="#node.nullable-type">nullable-type</a> </li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			
			<div id="node.method">
				<h4>10.7.16.4. method</h4>
				
				<ul class="layout">
					<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> name</li>
					<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.implements">
			<h3>10.7.17. implements</h3>
			
			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> interface</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Returns a bool object reference to the true or false objects. True if [object] implements [interface], false otherwise.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">if (o impls Foo)
	(o as Foo).propOfFoo()</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(if (impls o Foo)
	((cast o Foo).propOfFoo))</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.rational">
			<h3>10.7.18. rational</h3>
			
			<p>Base node. Evaluates to an object with BigRat as the active interface. The object may implement other interfaces if they do not conflict with the BigRat interface. Must not implement the LimRat interface.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( 123.456 )</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(println 123.456)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="node.set-property">
			<h3>10.7.19. set-property</h3>

			<ul class="layout">
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> source</li>
				<li><a href="#node.identifier">identifier</a> property name</li>
				<li><a href="#node.expression">expression</a> value</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Sets the value of a property. If the active interface of the value does not have a property with the specified name, or the property cannot be set, an error results. Evaluates to the value given by [value].</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">alpha.beta = &quot;gamma&quot;</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(= alpha.beta &quot;gamma&quot;)</code>
		</div>

		<div id="node.string">
			<h3>10.7.20. string</h3>
			
			<p>string nodes consist of text</p>
			
			<p>strings are expressions</p>
			
			<p>Base node. Evaluates to an object with interface string as the active interface. The object may implement other interfaces if they do not conflict with the string interface.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( &quot;this is a string&quot; )</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(println &quot;this is a string&quot;)</code>
		</div>
	</div>
</div>
	
	<div id="reserved-identikey-names">
		<h1>Chapter 11. Reserved identikey names</h1>

		<p>No user-defined identikeys can be associated with these identifiers.</p>

		<ul>
			<li>global - Namespace identikey that refers to the scope associated with the bundle node. Defined in the global scope.</li>
			<li>std - Namespace identikey for the standard library. Defined in the global scope.</li>
			<li>true - Constant strict identikey bound to the Bool enum true member. Defined in the global scope.</li>
			<li>false - Constant strict identikey bound to the Bool enum false member. Defined in the global scope.</li>
			<li>outer - Namespace identikey that refers to the outer scope. Defined in all scopes except the global scope. Note that outer::outer may be valid, depending on which scope it appers in.</li>
			<li>inst - Namespace identikey that exposes private fields of objects created by the class node. Defined in child scopes of class nodes.</li>
		</ul>
	</div>

	<div id="standard-library">
		<h1>Chapter 12. Standard library</h1>
		
		<p class="xxx">The standard library should be imported to a namespace by default. All members of that namespace can then be imported into the global scope with the &quot;expose&quot; node. However, what should the name of that namespace be? (The section above uses &quot;std&quot;, and Agent 001 used &quot;std&quot;.) Possibilites: standard, system, language, and various capitalizations (Standard, System, Language) and abbreviations (std, stand, sys, lang) thereof.</p>

		<ul>
			
			<li>interface Object</li>
			<li>interface Interface</li>
			<li>... Bool</li>
			<li>interface String</li>
			<li>interface Int</li>
			<li>interface Rat</li>
			<li>interface BigInt</li>
			<li>interface BigRat</li>
			<li>interface&lt;I&gt; Generator</li>
			<li>interface Octet</li>
			<li>interface Blob</li>

			
			<li>interface&lt;I&gt; Ref</li>
			<li>interface&lt;I&gt; WeakRef</li>
			<li>interface&lt;I&gt; Array</li>
			<li>... Deque</li>
			<li>func toDeque&lt;I&gt;(Collection&lt;I&gt;) Deque&lt;I&gt;</li>
			<li>... Chain</li> 
			
			
			<li>func&lt;I&gt;(val)I cast</li>
			<li>func(val, Interface face)Bool implements?</li>

			
			<li>Bool true</li>
			<li>Bool false</li>
		</ul>
		
		<pre>decl Deque numbers = Deque(3, 4, 5, 9)
numbers.pushFront(2)
numbers.pushFront(1)
numbers.popBack()
println(join(numbers, &quot; &quot;)) //prints &quot;1 2 3 4 5&quot;

decl Array&lt;Int&gt; numbers2 = Array&lt;Int&gt;(10, 11, 12, 13)
decl Deque&lt;Int&gt; numbers3 = toDeque&lt;Int&gt;(numbers2)</pre>

		<pre>possible additions:

interface&lt;I&gt; Collection
interface&lt;I&gt; List
	indexed
	elements can be added to beginning and end
	dynamic array
interface&lt;I&gt; FwdChain
	forward chain, a singly-linked list
interface&lt;I&gt; Deck
	a deque with an easier name
interface Complex
	a complex number where both parts are limited to rational numbers
interface&lt;I&gt; Grid
	a 2-dimensional array
interface&lt;I&gt; Vector
	a resizable list
interface&lt;I&gt; Queue
interface&lt;I&gt; Stack
interface&lt;I&gt; Dict, SortedDict, MultDict, SortedMultDict, BiDict, SortedBiDict, MiltBiDict, SortedMultiBiDict
interface&lt;I&gt; Set, OrderdSet, MultiSet, OrderdMultiSect

func getProperty(dyn value, String propertyName) dyn
func setProperty(dyn value, String propertyName, dyn propertyValue) dyn

fixed-width/fixed-precision numbers
fixed-point integers
&quot;limited&quot; namespace
interface LimInt
interface LimRat<p class="xxx">How to differentiate between mutable and immmutable versions?</p>
		</pre>
		
		<pre>//T is the type of an entry in this enum
interface&lt;T : EnumEntry&gt; Enum
	inherit Collection&lt;T&gt;
	func fromName(String str) T

//an Enum where every entry has an associated value
//T is the type of an entry in this enum
//U is the type of a value of an enum entry
interface&lt;T : EnumDictEntry, U&gt; EnumDict
	inherit Enum&lt;T&gt;
	func fromValue(U val) T

interface EnumEntry
	get String name
	func equals?( EnumEntry ) Bool

//U is the type of value each entry is associated with
interface&lt;U&gt; EnumDictEntry
	inherit EnumEntry
	get U value</pre>

		<div id="object.println">
			<h2>12.1. println</h2>
			
			<pre>interface PrintLnFace {
	call( param Stringable objs[] ) PrintLnFace
}
declfirst PrintLnFace println = ...</pre>
			
			<p class="xxx">Need some way for client code to obtain function interfaces that return themselves. For example, &quot;func(...)Self&quot; and &quot;getRecursiveFuncFace(...)&quot;. Then, the interface of println could be defined as something like &quot;func(param Stringable objs[]) Self&quot;.</p>
			
			<p class="xxx">Need to define varargs (variadic functions).</p>
			
			<p>Takes in multiple Stringable values, prints each to standard output, and returns itself.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">println( 1, &quot; &quot;, 2, &quot; &quot;, 3 ) /* call once with multiple arguments */
println(1)(&quot; &quot;)(2)(&quot; &quot;)(3) /* call several times with one argument each time */
println 1 &quot; &quot; 2 &quot; &quot; 3 /* call several times with one argument each time */</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">(println 1 &quot; &quot; 2 &quot; &quot; 3) /* call once with multiple arguments */
(((((println 1) &quot; &quot;) 2) &quot; &quot;) 3) /* call several times with one argument each time */</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.activeInterface">
			<h2>12.2. activeInterface</h2>
			
			<pre>func activeInterface(dyn) Interface

println( activeInterface(false) == Bool ) //true</pre>
			
			<p>Returns the interface that is the active interafce of the specified value.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.String">
			<h2>12.3. String</h2>
			
			<p>Besides downcasting to an Interface, String can also be called to produce a String.</p>
			
			<pre>func String( Collection&lt;Int&gt; unicodeCodePoints ) String</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.cast">
			<h2>12.4. func{I}(dyn)I cast</h2>
			
			<p>The cast function returns an object cast to the specified interface, or throws a cast error. The returned object must be the same object that was passed in.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">if (foo is Bar)
	cast&lt;Bar&gt;(foo).propOfBar()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.ceil">
			<h2>12.5. ceil</h2>
			
			<pre>func ceil(Rat) Int</pre>
			
			<p>Finds the ceiling of the specified rational number.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.floor">
			<h2>12.6. floor</h2>
			
			<pre>func floor(Rat) Int</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.modulo">
			<h2>12.7. modulo</h2>
			
			<p>Finds the remainder of dividing two integers.</p>
			
			<pre>func modulo( Int dividend, Int divisor, ModuloMethod method = ModuloMethod.divisor ) Int

enum ModuloMethod {
	dividend,
	divisor,
	positive,
	negative
}</pre>
			
			<p>When one or both of dividend and divisor are negative, there could be two possible remainders, one positive and one negative. In such a case, the ModuloMethod determines which of these to return. When there is only one possible remainder, the ModuloMethod is ignored.</p>
			
			<p>The &quot;dividend&quot; option returns the remainder with the same sign as the dividend. The &quot;divisor&quot; option returns the remainder with the same sign as the divisor. The &quot;positive&quot; option returns the positive remainder. The &quot;negative&quot; option returns the negative remainder.</p>
			
			<p>This function should throw an error if divisor is 0.</p>
			

			
			<pre>modulo(15, 4, dividend) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, 4, divisor) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, 4, positive) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, 4, negative) -&gt; 3

modulo(15, -4, dividend) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, -4, divisor) -&gt; -1
modulo(15, -4, positive) -&gt; 3
modulo(15, -4, negative) -&gt; -1

modulo(-15, 4, dividend) -&gt; -3
modulo(-15, 4, divisor) -&gt; 1
modulo(-15, 4, positive) -&gt; 1
modulo(-15, 4, negative) -&gt; -3

modulo(-15, -4, dividend) -&gt; -3
modulo(-15, -4, divisor) -&gt; -3
modulo(-15, -4, positive) -&gt; 1
modulo(-15, -4, negative) -&gt; -3</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.round">
			<h2>12.8. round</h2>
			
			<pre>func round(Rat, RoundMethod = nearest_away) Int

enum RoundMethod {
	up, //ceiling
	down, //floor
	awayFromZero,
	towardsZero, //truncation
	nearest_up,
	nearest_down,
	nearest_away, //common rounding
	nearest_towards,
	nearest_unbiased //unbiased rounding, bankers rounding
}</pre>
			
			<p>Rounds a rational number to an integer using the specified method. The nearest_* method comes in various forms to determine what to do when the rational number is exactly halfway between two integers. For all rational numbers that are not exactly halfway between two rational numbers, the nearest_* methods behave the same. The nearest_unbiased method rounds to the nearest even integer when the number is exactly halfway between two integers. (This is most commonly called bankers rounding.)</p>
			
			<pre>round(3.1) -&gt; 3
round(3.1, up) -&gt; 4

round(3.5) -&gt; 4
round(3.5, nearest_towards) -&gt; 3

round(3.9) -&gt; 4
round(3.9, nearest_towards) -&gt; 4

round(-3.1) -&gt; -3
round(-3.1, up) -&gt; -3

round(-3.5) -&gt; -4
round(-3.5, nearest_towards) -&gt; -3

round(-3.9) -&gt; -4
round(-3.9, nearest_towards) -&gt; -4

round(3.4, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 3
round(3.5, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 4
round(3.6, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 4

round(8.4, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 8
round(8.5, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 8
round(8.500000001, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 9
round(8.6, nearest_unbiased) -&gt; 9</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.generator">
			<h2>12.9. interface generator</h2>
			
			<pre>interface{I} generator
	func next() I</pre>
			
			<p>The next() method will return objects when called until it throws a GeneratorDone exception.</p>
			
			<p>Some looping constructs will automatically obtain a generator by calling the object's getValueIterator, getKeyIterator, or getPairIterator method, and call the next() method of the generator until the exception is thrown</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">MyClass[] objs
for each o in objs
	o.doStuff()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.id">
			<h2>12.10. func id</h2>
			
			<pre>func id(obj) Int

println( id(true) )</pre>
			
			<p>Every object is associated with a constant non-negative integer. No two objects that are still accessible can have the same object number. This function returns a value, with Int as the active interface, that encodes the object number for the object associated with the given value. Two objects with non-overlapping lifetimes may have the same object id.</p>
			
			<p>Returns a different number for every object. Always returns the same number for the same object, even if that object is a part of different values (the same object cast to different interfaces).</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.sameObject_q">
			<h2>12.11. func sameObject?</h2>
			
			<p>Determines whether the two values have the same object.</p>
			
			<pre>func sameObject?(obj, obj) Bool

println( sameObject?(foo, bar) )
//same as
println( (foo as obj) == (bar as obj) )
//same as
println( id(foo) == id(bar) )</pre>
			
			<p>Tells whether the values are associated with the same object.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.implements_q">
			<h2>12.12. func(obj, interface)bool implements?</h2>
			
			<p>Tells whether the object implements the interface, like the implements node.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">if implements(foo, Bar)
	(foo as Bar).propOfBar()</code>
		</div>
		
		
		<div id="ident.Int">
			<h2>12.13. interface Int</h2>
			
			<ul>
				
				<li>func lessThan?(Int) Bool</li>
				<li>func lessThanOrEqual?(Int) Bool</li>
				<li>func equal?(Int) Bool</li>
				<li>func greaterThanOrEqual?(Int) Bool</li>
				<li>func greaterThan?(Int) Bool</li>
				<li>func unequal?(Int) Bool</li>
				
				
				<li>Bool positive?</li>
				<li>Bool negative?</li>
				
				
				<li>func add(Int) Int</li>
				<li>func subtract(Int) Int</li>
				<li>func multiply(Int) Int</li>
				<li>func multiply(Rat) Rat</li>
				<li>func divide(Int) Rat</li>
				<li>func divide(Rat) Rat</li>
				<li>func floorDivide(Int) Int</li>
				<li>func floorDivide(Rat) Int</li>
				<li>func remainder(Int) Int</li>
				<li>Int absolute</li>
				
				
				<li>func add!(Int)</li>
				<li>func subtract!(Int)</li>
				<li>func multiply!(Int)</li>
				<li>func increment!()</li>
				<li>func decrement!()</li>
				<li>func floorDivide!(Int)</li>
				<li>func floorDivide!(Rat)</li>
				
				
				<li>func toBuiltin() Int</li>
				<li>convert Int</li> 
				<li>convert Rat</li>
				<li>convert String</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>The non-mutating methods of Int should never throw for precsion reasons, i.e. they should always return an Int that fully represents the result without loss of precision. However, the mutator methods may throw a PrecisionError if the value is not capable of representing the resultant integer.</p>
			
			<p>When Niviok implementations need to determine the value of Int objects that were implemented by user code, they should call the toBuiltin method to get an Int object that was implemented by the implementation. If toBuiltin throws an error, it should raise into user code. If the returned Int is not a built-in, an error results that should extend into user code.</p>
			
			<p>The String produced by the String convertee must represent the stored integer absolutely, with no loss of precision. It may throw an error if it is incapable of producing such a representation. There are no restrictions on how the integer should be represented, although Int implementations generally should try to produce a representation that is simple and short. Implementations of Int should prefer exotic and strange representations over throwing an error. For example, implementations should prefer representing a googolplex with e.g. &quot;10E(10E100)&quot; ofer throwing an error.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.BigInt">
			<h2>12.14. interface BigInt</h2>
			
			<p>Inherits from Int.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.BigRat">
			<h2>12.15. interface BigRat</h2>
			
			<p>Inherits from Rat.</p>
		</div>

		<div id="ident.Interface">
			<h2>12.16. interface Interface</h2>
			
			<ul>
				<li>get Bool fromAddition?</li>
				<li>get Set{Interface} inheritees</li>
				<li>get List{Parameters} parameters</li>
				<li>get Type returnType</li>
				<li>get List{Property} properties</li>
				<li>get List{Method} methods</li>
				<li>func add(Interface) Interface</li>
				<li>func subtract(Interface) Interface</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>Implements itself.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="object.Object">
			<h2>12.17. interface Object</h2>
			
			<ul>
				<li>Bool builtin?</li>
				<li>Bool mutable?</li>
				<li>Int number</li>
				<li>func{I} cast() I</li>
				<li>func implements? (Interface) Bool</li>
				<li>func sameObject? (Object) Bool</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>These methods expose the same functionality of some of the nodes.</p>
			
			<p>The builtin? property tells whether the object is implemented by the Niviok implementation, such as for integers and strings. The implements? method tells whether the object implements a specified interface.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="interface.rat">
			<h2>12.18. interface rat</h2>
			
			<ul>
				<li>func toInt() int</li>
				<li>func round() int</li>
				<li>func round!()</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>toInt will throw if the represented value is not already an integer. round should not throw. round! modifies the represented value.</p>
		</div>
		

		<p>Constant identikeys in the std namespace. The values these identikeys are bound to are immutable.</p>
		
		<ul>
			<li>interface InterfaceBuilder</li>
			<li>func()InterfaceBuilder CInterfaceBuilder</li>
		
			<li>func(int, interface[], interface)interface getFuncInterface</li>
			
			<li>interface{I} Iterator</li>
			
			
			<li>func{I}(:vararg)array{I} CArray</li>
			<li>func(bool[] bits, bool positive = true)int CInt</li>
			<li>func{I}(:vararg)list{I} CList</li>
			
			<li>func{I}(I)SelfGen print</li>
			<li>func{I}(I)SelfGen println</li>
		</ul>
		
		<div id="Generator">
			<h2>12.19. Generator</h2>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">generic&lt;T&gt;
interface Generator {
	func yield() T //throws a GeneratorExhausted exception (which inherits from SpecialCase) when all values have been yielded
}</code>
		</div>
		
		
		<div id="InterfaceBuilder">
			<h2>12.20. InterfaceBuilder</h2>
		
			<ul>
				<li>map{string, interface} properties</li>
				
				<li>bool alwaysImmutable?</li> 
				<li>func()interface generate</li>
			</ul>
			
			<p>interface interface is always immutable, so InterfaceBuilder exists to allow creating interface objects procedurally.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="Iterator">
			<h2>12.21. Iterator</h2>
			
			<pre>interface{I} Iterator
	//values may change
	bool first?
	bool last?
	bool hasNext?
	bool hasPrevious?
	bool between? //iterator points between 2 items (such as after the item was removed)
	bool valid?

	//capabilities of the iterator - values should not change
	bool canMoveForward? //whether the iterator can move forward
	bool canMoveBackward? //whether the iterator can move backwards
	bool canRemove?
	bool canReplace? //whether the objects can be replaced with different objects
	bool canRead?
	bool canInsertAfter?
	bool canInsertBefore?
	bool canCompareCollection?
	bool canCompareIterator? //corresponds to equal?
	bool canComparePosition? //corresponds to before? and after?

	func moveForward()
	func moveBackward()
	func remove()
	func replace(I)
	func insertAfter(I)
	func insertBefore(I)
	func sameCollection?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	func before?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	func after?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	func equal?( Iterator{I} ) bool
	
	I value</pre>

			<p>An iterator is used to access the elements in a container. If the elements are not ordered 2-dimensionally, an 2-dimensional order must be decided for the iterator that does not change for that iterator instance. If the elements in the container are ordered 2-dimensionally, the iterator must refer the elements in that order.</p>

			<p>The equals? method returns true if both iterators are pointing to same item of the same collection. If the collection is unordered, the order the iterator moves over items must also be the same.</p>

			<p>A valid iterator either refers to an element or a position between two elements. An iterator should only refer to a position between two elements when the element the iterator currently pointed to was removed. If the iterator is not valid, or read? is false, the value property refers to null.</p>
			
			<p>An iterator only becomes invalid if:</p>
			<ul>
				<li>the container contains no objects</li>
				<li>the iterator is moved beyond all objects</li>
				<li>a non-supported method is called (example: moveBackward() is called on an iterator that can only move forward)</li>
			</ul>

			<p>If an iterator is not valid, it may be possible to revalidate it by calling next() or previous(). For example, if the iterator refers to the last object and next is called, the iterator becomes invalid, but calling previous may make the iterator valid again. Whether an iterator can be revalidated and under what circumstances the iterator is revalidated is dependant on the implementation of the iterator.</p>
			
			<p>Containers should always give iterators with the same functionality. For example, if a container, when it has three elements, gives an iterator with forward? set to true, it should also give an iterator with the property forward? set to true when it has 1, even though calling moveForward() would invalidate the iterator.</p>

			<code xml:space="preserve">Container{int} numbers;
Iterator iter = numbers.iterate();
int num = iter.value

while( iter.valid? )
	int num = iter.value
	iter.moveForward()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="CInterfaceBuilder">
			<h2>12.22. CInterfaceBuilder</h2>
			
			<p>CInterfaceBuilder, when called, returns an object that can be used to procedurally and/or dynamically create interface objects.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="getFuncInterface">
			<h2>12.23. getFuncInterface</h2>
			
			<pre>func getFuncInterface (
	int templateParamCount,
	interface[] params,
	interface returnInterface,
) interface</pre>
			
			<p>Returns an interface specifying a call method with the specified number of template parameters, the specified parameters, and the specified return interface. If returnInterface is null, the interface specifies a void call method. Every time it is called with the same arguments, it must return the same object.</p>
		</div>
	</div>
	
	<div id="warnings-list">
		<h1>Chapter 13. Warnings</h1>
		
		<p>This is a list of warnings predefined by this specification. Agents should create other warnings whenever needed.</p>
		
		<table>
			<tbody>
				<tr>
					<th>name</th>
					<th>meaning</th>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>always null</td>
					<td>A node that will never produce a value when executed is being used as if it will sometimes produce a value. This warning is produced by the node that attempts to make use of the output, such as an assignment node, and not the node that doesn't produce.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>unknown warning</td>
					<td>A warning name in an ignore node is not recognized.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>no effect</td>
					<td>The output of a node that does not have side effects is not being used. For example, if a block contains an integer node (that is not last), the integer node has no effect.</td>
				</tr>
			</tbody>
		</table>
	</div>

	<div id="error-handling-processing">
		<h1>Chapter 14. Error handling during processing</h1>
		
		<p>If an error is found during processing, and none of the already generated nodes have been executed, all generated nodes in the entire Niviok tree must not be used for purposes beyond explaining the source of errors. Construction of the Niviok node tree may continue after errors are found. The main() function must not be called, and the members should not be exposed as a library.</p>
			
		<p>If errors occur while generating the Niviok node tree, and execution has already begun, a warning should immediately be emitted describing the error. How this warning is emitted is undefined. Generation of the Niviok node tree may continue. When execution reaches the damaged section of the tree, an error should be thrown describing the error. If execution never reaches the damaged section of the tree, the error should have no effect.</p>
	</div>
	
	<div id="warnings">
		<h1>Chapter 15. warnings</h1>
		
		<table>
			<tbody>
				<tr>
					<th>string identifier</th>
					<th>meaning</th>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>always null</td>
					<td>A node that will never produce a value when executed is being used as if it will produce a value. Example: The result is being assigned to an identikey or passed as an argument. This applies to node types like <a href="#node.call">call</a> which can sometimes produce a value, if a particular instance can be determined to never produce a value. (XXX should this warning apply to using nodes like throw, break, or return as expressions?)</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>unreachable</td>
					<td>Code is unreachable. Execution will never reach a particular piece of code.</td>
				</tr>
			</tbody>
		</table>
	</div>
	
	<div id="rationales">
		<h1>Chapter 16. Rationales</h1>
		
		<p>This chapter explains the decisions behind various choices made for Niviok.</p>
		
		<div id="rationale.dynamic-static-typing">
			<h2>16.1. Dynamic static typing</h2>
			
			<p>Dynamic static typing refers to explicitly using and enforcing type information that isn't available until runtime. The type information isn't known until runtime, but after it's known, it's enforced and can't be changed.</p>
			
			<p>An example of this is loading an interface from a library and then using obtaining values with that interface through the library. The loaded interface can be used as the type for function parameters, free identifiers, etc. So although the interface wasn't known until runtime, one the information was known, it was enforced, and the values of that interface are only accessed by ensuring they are of that interface.</p>
			
			<p>Dynamic static typing can do nothing beforehand to ensure property/method access is correct, but it can ensure that various values are of the same type. For example, consider the case where an interface is loaded from a library and bound to an identifer. Then a free identifier is declared to be of that type, and a function is declared to accept a value of that type. An implementation will known that the free identifer and the function's parameter are of the same type, so the value bound to the free identifier can safely be passed to the function. This safety could not be ensured with fully dynamic typing.</p>
			
			<p>Dynamic static typing is not as safe as fully static typing, but interfaces cannot always be known before runtime, which is a requirement for fully static typing. Therefore, Niviok should provide something to give more type safety for the cases when interfaces cannot be known until runtime. Dynamic static typing is safer than fully dynamic typing.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">Interface Foo = lib['Foo']
Interface Bar = lib['Bar']
func()Foo getFoo = lib['getFoo']
func(Bar)Int doStuff = lib['doStuff']

Foo foo = getFoo() //static typing: known beforehand that types match
foo.somthing() //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether Foo declares a 'somthing' method
doStuff(foo) //static typing: known beforehand that types don't match

---

Dyn getFoo = lib['getFoo']
Dyn doStuff = lib['doStuff']

Dyn foo = getFoo() //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether types match
foo.somthing() //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether value of foo has a &quot;somthing&quot; method
doStuff(foo) //dynamic typing: don't know beforehand whether types match</code>
			
			<p>Arguments against: Interfaces should almost always be known beforehand. Dynamic static typing may be very rarely used, and could encourage bad programming.</p>
		</div>
		
		<div id="rationale.terms">
			<h2>16.2. Terms</h2>
			
			<div id="rationale.get-set">
				<h3>16.2.1. get/set</h3>
								
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th>term as verb</th>
							<th>term as noun</th>
							<th>good points</th>
							<th>bad points</th>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>get</td>
							<td>getter</td>
							<td>short, easy to say, easy to spell, common amoung programming languages</td>
							<td>implies the property has been taken away</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>set</td>
							<td>setter</td>
							<td>short, easy to say, easy to spell, common amoung programming languages</td>
							<td>sounds more like adding a new property than changing the value of a pre-existing property</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>access</td>
							<td>accessor</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>retrieve</td>
							<td>retriever</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>read</td>
							<td>reader</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>write</td>
							<td>writer</td>
						</tr>
						
						<tr>
							<td>mutate</td>
							<td>mutator</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				
				<p>Additional notes:</p>
				<p>The one letter difference between &quot;get&quot; and &quot;set&quot; (and &quot;getter&quot; and &quot;setter&quot;) could cause errors more easily than if the difference were greater. Also, the noun form is slightly irregular; some people may expect &quot;geter&quot; and &quot;seter&quot; to be the noun form.</p>
			</div>
		</div>
		
		<div id="rationale.executing-boolean-logic">
			<h2>16.3. Executing boolean logic nodes</h2>
			
			<p>In other languages, functions/methods that return boolean values are often chained together with short-circuiting boolean logic nodes. XOR and XNOR nodes cannot short-circuit, and thus this does not apply to them.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">list.empty? $or list.clear()
//similar to:
$if $not list.empty? : list.clear()

list.empty? $and list = getValues()
//similar to:
$if list.empty? : list = getValues()</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="executing-declaration-first">
			<h2>16.4. Disallowing executing declaration-first</h2>
			
			<p>Children of declaration-first nodes are executed when the scope is first created, which may involve executing an identifier associated with a variable identikey. When execution reaches a declaration-first node, the identifiers used to create the initial value assigned to the identikey may be assigned to different values. Thus, executing a declaration-first node could produce unexpected results.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">$decl Int alpha = 12345

$block {
	alpha = 9000
	println ( $decl-first Int beta = alpha ) //prints &quot;12345&quot;
}</code>
			
			<p>In the above example, alpha is executed and assigned to beta when the scope for the block node is created. Then, 9000 is assigned to alpha. Then, the declaration-first node is executed, producing the value assigned to beta, which is 12345. A programmer may have expected beta to be bound to the current value of alpha, which is 9000.</p>
		</div>
	</div>

	<div id="unsorted-stuff">
		<h1>Chapter 17. unsorted stuff</h1>

		<div id="closures">
			<h2>17.1. Closures</h2>
			
			<p>Functions and classes (amoung others) have references to their containing scope. Identifier references in these scopes can be accessed and modified by the functions/classes.</p>
			
			<p>Copy closures create copies of specific values when a function node is executed. Modifying this copy does not modify the captured scope.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">//regular closures

func makePrinters(Int max) func()void[] {
	func()void[] printers = new func()void[]
	Int i = 1
	while i &lt;= max {
		printers &lt;&lt; func()void {
			print i + ' '
		}
		i++
	}
	return printers
}

//array of functions that have no parameters and return nothing
func()void[] printers = makePrinters(10)
for printer in printers {
	printer()
}

//output
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 

Each of the anonymous functions held a reference to the same scope where i was defined. Because i held 10 when the functions were called, each output 10.</code>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">//copy closures

func makePrinters(Int max) func()void[] {
	func()void[] printers = new func()void[]
	Int i = 1
	while i &lt;= max {
		printers &lt;&lt; func()void {
			copyclosure i
			print i + ' '
		}
		i++
	}
	return printers
}

//array of functions that have no parameters and return nothing
func()void[] printers = makePrinters(10)
for printer in printers {
	printer()
}

//output
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Each of the anynonymous functions held a copy of the value of i at the time the function was created.</code>
		</div>

		<div id="tree-examples">
			<h2>17.2. Tree examples</h2>
				
			<div id="tree-example-1">
				<h3>17.2.1. Example 1</h3>
					
				<code xml:space="preserve">global
	declare-const
		identifier
			&quot;main&quot;
		expression [value] (function-definition)
			function-parameter
				identifier
					&quot;args&quot;
				expression [interface] (interface-template-instantiation)
					expression [interface-template] (identifier)
						&quot;array&quot;	
					expression [template-argument] (identifier)
						&quot;string&quot;
			expression [return-interface] (identifier)
				&quot;int&quot;
			expression (return)
				expression (integer)
					0

func main(string[] args) int
	return 0</code>
			</div>
				
			<div id="tree-example-2">
				<h3>17.2.2. Example 2</h3>
					
				<code xml:space="preserve">global (global)
	declaration (declaration &gt; function-declaration)
		name (string)
			&quot;main&quot;
		return (expression &gt; object-reference)
			name (string)
				&quot;int&quot;
		item (item &gt; return)
			value (expression &gt; integer)
				0

func main() int
	return 0

&lt;global type=&quot;global&quot;&gt;
	&lt;declaration type=&quot;function-declaration&quot;&gt;
		&lt;name type=&quot;string&quot;&gt;main&lt;/name&gt;
		&lt;return type=&quot;object-reference&quot;&gt;
			&lt;name type=&quot;string&quot;&gt;int&lt;/name&gt;
		&lt;/return&gt;
		&lt;item type=&quot;return&quot;&gt;
			&lt;value type=&quot;integer&quot;&gt;0&lt;/value&gt;
		&lt;/item&gt;
	&lt;/declaration&gt;
&lt;/global&gt;</code>
			</div>

			<div id="tree-example-3">
				<h3>17.2.3. Example 3</h3>
					
				<code xml:space="preserve">global (global)
	name-bind (name-bind)
		identifier (identifier)
			&quot;main&quot;
		expression (function-definition)
			parameter (parameter)
				interface (interface &gt; function-call)
					function (function &gt; identifier)
						&quot;array&quot;
					argument (expression &gt; identifier)
						&quot;string&quot;
				identifier (identifier)
					&quot;args&quot;
		return-interface (interface &gt; identifier)
			&quot;int&quot;
		expression (expression &gt; return)
			expression (expression &gt; literal-integer)
				0

func main(string[] args) int
	return 0

&lt;global type=&quot;global&quot;&gt;
	&lt;name-bind type=&quot;name-bind&quot;&gt;
		&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;main&lt;/identifier&gt;
		&lt;expression type=&quot;function-definition&quot;&gt;
			&lt;parameter-list type=&quot;parameter-list&quot;&gt;
				&lt;parameter type=&quot;parameter&quot;&gt;
					&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;args&lt;/identifier&gt;
					&lt;expression type=&quot;function-call&quot;&gt;
						&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;array&lt;/identifier&gt;
						&lt;argument-list type=&quot;argument-list&quot;&gt;
							&lt;identifier type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;string&lt;/identifier&gt;
						&lt;/argument-list&gt;
					&lt;/expression&gt;
				&lt;/parameter&gt;
			&lt;/parameter-list&gt;
			&lt;return-interface type=&quot;identifier&quot;&gt;int&lt;/return-interface&gt;
			&lt;expression-list type=&quot;expression-list&quot;&gt;
				&lt;expression type=&quot;return&quot;&gt;
					&lt;expression type=&quot;literal-integer&quot;&gt;0&lt;/expression&gt;
				&lt;/expression&gt;
			&lt;/expression-list&gt;
		&lt;/function&gt;
	&lt;/name-bind&gt;
&lt;/global&gt;</code>
			</div>
		</div>
		
		<div id="get-interface">
			<h2>17.3. get interface</h2>
			
			<p>It's always possible to bind the interface of an object to an identifier.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">func getInterface{I}(I o) {
return I;
}

dynref o = getMysteryObj()
interface i = getInterface(o)
i o2 = o</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="obj-interface">
			<h2>17.4. obj interface</h2>
			
			<p>All objects automatically implement the &quot;obj&quot; interface.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">obj foo = getAnObject()
(myinterface foo) .doStuff 3</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="identifier-binding">
			<h2>17.5. Binding to identifiers</h2>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">int alpha</code>
			<p>Declares that &quot;alpha&quot; can refer to objects that implement the &quot;int&quot; interface. alpha currently doesn't refer to anything; i.e. it refers to null.</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">alpha = 3</code>
			<p>Creates an object that implements the int interface and makes alpha refer to it</p>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">int beta = 5</code>
			<p>Declares that &quot;beta&quot; can refer to objects that implement the &quot;beta&quot; interface. Creates an object that implements the int interface. Binds the object to &quot;beta&quot;.</p>
			
			<p>Multiple identifiers can refer to the same object.</p>
			<code xml:space="preserve">obj o = getObj()
int a = o
rat b = o</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="print-println-return-interfaces">
			<h2>17.6. Return interfaces of print and println</h2>
			
			<p>Below, [unbound] means the interface is not bound to an identifier. However, these interfaces can be bound to identifiers and used like any user-created interface, and they have no special properties.</p>
			
			<ul>
				<li>func{I}(I)[unbound] print</li>
				<li>func{I}(I)[unbound] println</li>
			</ul>

			<pre>interface{I} Print
	func call(I) Print

interface{I} PrintLine
	func call(I) PrintLine</pre>
			
			<p>When print is called, it returns an object that implements an interface like Print. When println is called, it returns an object that implements an interface like PrintLine. Neither interface is bound to an identifier when execution begins. They are not the same interface, meaning print(1).interface == println(1).interface executes to false.</p>
			
			<pre>println 1 2 3 &quot;a&quot; &quot;b&quot; &quot;c&quot; 4.5 6.7 8.9</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="adjuncts">
			<h2>17.7. Adjuncts</h2>
			
			<code xml:space="preserve">interface IMyInterface
	public func doStuffA()
	public func doStuffB()

class MyClass
	:implements(IMyInterface)
	...

func IMyInterface.doAB()
	this.doStuffA()
	this.doStuffB()

func testThing(ref IMyInterface arg)
	arg.doAB()

MyClass inst
testThing(inst)</code>
		</div>
		
		<div id="runtime-inteface">
			<h2>17.8. runtime interface implementation</h2>
		
			<p>With Niviok, you should be able to write a function that takes an interface (foo) and returns a function that takes an object of that interface (foo) and returns an object that implements that same interface (foo), but with an implementation that writes to a log anytime a method is called.</p>
		
			<pre>log l = Log()
foo o = Foo()
foo wrapped = wrap(o, l)
doStuffWithAFoo(wrapped)</pre>
		
			<p>Now anytime a method is called on the object, a log entry could be written.</p>
		
			<pre>func{I} wrap(I o, log l) I
objbuilder wrapper = newObjbuilder()
wrapper.implement(I)
for prop in I.props
wrapper.interfaces[I].setProp( prop.name,
func(:vararg)obj

interface i = newInterface()
i.inherit(I)
for prop in 

wrap(...) takes an interface and returns a function
wrap(foo)(...) takes a foo and returns a foo</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="runtime-interface-creation">
			<h2>17.9. Runtime interface creation</h2>
			
			<pre>func createInterface( map{string,dyn} methods ) interface
	interface rv = newInterface()
	for (name, meth) in methods
		rv.methods.add( pair(name, meth.functionSignature) )
	return rv

func foo(int b) string
...

func bar(float c, float d) myClass
...

func baz(widget1 e, widget4 f)
...

map(string, func) table = {
&quot;methA&quot;: foo,
&quot;methB&quot;: bar,
&quot;methC&quot;: baz
}
interface myinterface = createInterface(table)

func alpha(int g) string
...

func beta(float h, float i) myClass
...

func gamma(widget1 j, widget4 k)
...

myinterface myobj = {
methA: alpha,
methB: beta,
methC: gamma
}
string str = obj.methA(3)
myClass val = obj.methB(5.5, 7.7)
obj.gamma( createWidget1(), Widget4Factory.makeOne() )</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="self-return-type">
			<h2>17.10. &quot;self&quot; return type</h2>
			
			<pre>func(int,float)self

is the same as

interface __foo__
	func call(int,float) __foo__

func example(int num) self
	...
	
example 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 //calls the example function 10 times</pre>
		</div>

		<div id="bind">
			<h2>17.11. Bind</h2>
			
			<pre>interface foo
	...

func bar(foo o, int num)
	...

foo fooInst = getAFoo()
bar(fooInst, 3)
(fooInst =&gt; bar) 3
func() funcy = (fooInst =&gt; bar)
funcy(3)</pre>
		
			<p>obj =&gt; func</p>
		
			<p>The &quot;=&gt;&quot; operator binds the obj to the first argument of the function. It executes to a function. Semantically this creates a function-definition with a closure of the obj and func.</p>
		</div>

		<div id="classes">
			<h2>17.12. Classes</h2>
			
			<p>Classes produce functors that, when called, create objects. If a class implements more than 1 interface, it can declare which of the implemented interfaces is the active interface of the returned object by marking an interface as default. If no interface is marked, the active interface is obj.</p>
		</div>

		<div id="noninstantiated-interface-templates">
			<h2>17.13. Noninstantiated interface templates</h2>
		
			<pre>interface list{I}
	readonly int count
	func pushFront(I o)
	func popFront() I

struct node{C}
	node{C} next = null
	node{C} value = null

class makeList{T}
	node{T} first
	
	interface list{T} #default //so makeList returns a list instead of an obj that has to be cast
		...

list{int} nums = makeList{int}()
nums.pushFront(3)
nums.pushFront(5)
print nums.size //2

list{string} names = makeList{string}()
names.pushFront(&quot;John&quot;)
names.pushFront(&quot;Sarah&quot;)
names.pushFront(&quot;Billy&quot;)
print names.size //3

list someList = nums
print someList.size //2
someList.pushFront(5) //error</pre>
			
			<p>someList may refer to any kind of list, such as list{foo}, list{bar}, etc, so only methods that have the same paramater and return interfaces for all list{}s can be called.</p>
		</div>

		<div id="dynamic-library-loading">
			<h2>17.14. Dynamic library loading</h2>
		
			<p>The selectLibrary function enables gaining references to objects without knowing the nodes that created the objects.</p>
		
			<pre>interface Library
	readonly String path
	readonly String name
	readonly String version
	readonly Bool loaded?
	func key(String name) Dyn
	func get{I}(String name) I
	func load()
	func unload()

//prototype
func selectLibrary(string identifier, string version, bool load? = true) Library

---

string identifier
string version
if platform == platforms.MacOSX or platform == platforms.Windows
	identifier = &quot;libxml&quot;
	version = &quot;2.1&quot;
elif platform == platforms.Linux
	identifier = &quot;/usr/lib/libxml.so&quot;
	version = &quot;56&quot;
else
	throw Error(&quot;unsupported platform&quot;)

Library XmlLib = selectLibrary(identifier, version)

Interface XmlElement = XmlLib.get{Interface}(&quot;XmlElement&quot;)
Dyn XmlReader = XmlLib[&quot;XmlReader&quot;]

XmlElement element = XmlRead.read(&quot;foo.xml&quot;).documentElement</pre>
		</div>
		
		<div id="static-typing">
			<h2>17.15. Static typing</h2>
			
			<p>XXX spec out static typing and demand that implementations check all typing as much as possible before running anything. Note the section on dynamic static typing.</p>
		</div>
	</div>
</body></html>